[[A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man]]

A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man is the first novel of Irish writer James Joyce. A Künstlerroman in a modernist style, it traces the intellectual and religio-philosophical awakening of young Stephen Dedalus, a fictional alter ego of Joyce and an allusion to Daedalus, the consummate craftsman of Greek mythology. Stephen questions and rebels against the Catholic and Irish conventions under which he has grown, and culminates with his self-exile from Ireland in Europe. The work uses techniques that Joyce developed more fully in Ulysses (1922) and Finnegans Wake (1939).

A Portrait began life in 1903 as Stephen Hero—a projected 63-chapter autobiographical novel in a realistic style. After 25 chapters, Joyce abandoned Stephen Hero in 1907 and set to reworking its themes and protagonist into a condensed five-chapter novel, dispensing with strict realism and making extensive use of free indirect speech that allowed the reader to peer into Stephen's developing consciousness. American modernist poet Ezra Pound had the novel serialized in the English literary magazine The Egoist in 1914 and 1915, and published as a book in 1916 by B. W. Huebsch of New York. The publication of A Portrait and the short story collection Dubliners (1914) earned Joyce a place at the forefront of literary modernism.

==Background==
James Joyce in 1915
Born to a middle-class family in Dublin, Ireland, James Joyce (1882–1941) excelled as a student, graduating from University College Dublin in 1902. He moved to Paris to study medicine, but soon gave it up. He returned to Ireland at his family's request as his mother was dying of cancer; despite her pleas, the impious Joyce and his brother Stanislaus refused to make confession or take communion, and when she passed into a coma refused to kneel and pray for her. He took jobs teaching, singing, and reviewing books while drinking heavily.

Joyce made his first attempt at a novel, Stephen Hero, in early 1904. That June he met Nora Barnacle, with whom he eloped to Europe, first staying in Zürich before settling for ten years in Trieste in Austria-Hungary, teaching English. There, Nora gave birth to their children George in 1905 and Lucia in 1907, and Joyce wrote fiction, signing some of his early essays and stories "Stephen "; the short stories he wrote were to make up Dubliners (1914). He reworked the core themes of the novel Stephen Hero he had begun in Ireland in 1904 and abandoned in 1907 into A Portrait, published in 1916, a year after moving back to Zürich in the midst of World War I.

==Composition==

At the request of its editors, Joyce submitted a work of philosophical fiction entitled "A Portrait of the Artist" to the Irish literary magazine Dana on 7 January 1904. Dana editor W. K. Magee rejected it, telling Joyce, "I can't print what I can't understand." On his 22nd birthday, 2 February 1904, Joyce began a realist autobiographical novel, Stephen Hero, that incorporated aspects of the aesthetic philosophy expounded in "A Portrait". He worked on the book until mid-1905 and brought the manuscript with him when he moved to Trieste that year. Though his main attention turned to the stories that were to make up Dubliners, Joyce continued work on Stephen Hero. At 914 manuscript pages, Joyce considered the book about half-finished having completed 25 of its 63 intended chapters. Bulson (2006:47) In September 1907 he abandoned this work and began a complete revision of the text and its structure which would become A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. By 1909, the work had taken shape and Joyce showed some of the draft chapters to Ettore Schmitz, one of his language students, as an exercise. Schmitz, himself a respected writer, was impressed and under his encouragement Joyce continued work on the book. In 1911, Joyce flew into a fit of rage over the continued refusals by publishers to print Dubliners and threw the manuscript of Portrait into the fire. This was saved by a "family fire brigade" including of his sister Eileen. Bulson (2006:47) Chamber Music, book of Joyce's poetry, came into print in 1907.

Joyce showed, in his own words, "a scrupulous meanness" in his use of materials for the book. He recycled the two earlier attempts at explaining his aesthetics and youth, A Portrait of the Artist and Stephen Hero, as well as his notebooks from Trieste concerning the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas expounded in the book, into five carefully paced chapters. Johnson (2000:xviii) 
Whilst Stephen Hero is written from the point of view of an omniscient third person narrator, Joyce adopts the free indirect style in Portrait, a change which reflects the moving of the narrative centre of consciousness firmly and uniquely onto Stephen. Persons and events take their significance from Stephen and are perceived from his point of view. Johnson (2000:xvii) The stylistic and structural changes laid down with careful selection by Joyce. Characters and places are no longer mentioned simply because the young Joyce had known them. Salient details are carefully chosen and compressed into the aesthetic pattern of the novel. Johnson (2000:xvii) 

==Publication history==

Ezra Pound had A Portrait brought into print.

In 1913, Irish poet W. B. Yeats recommended Joyce's work to avant-garde American poet Ezra Pound, who was assembling a poetry anthology. Pound wrote to Joyce, and in 1914, Joyce submitted the first chapter of the unfinished Portrait to Pound, who was so taken with it that he pressed to have the work serialized in the London literary magazine The Egoist. Joyce hurried to complete the novel, and from 2 February 1914 to 1 September 1915 it appeared in The Egoist in twenty-five instalments.

There was difficulty finding an English publisher for the finished novel, so Pound arranged for its publication by American publishing house B. W. Huebsch, who printed it 29 December 1916. Egoist Press republished it in England 12 February 1917, and Jonathan Cape took over its publication in 1924. Viking Press issued a corrected version in 1964 overseen by Chester Anderson, and Garland released a copy-text edition by Hans Walter Gabler in 1993.

==Major characters==

Stephen Dedalus - The main character of A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. Growing up, Stephen goes through long phases of hedonism and deep religiosity. He eventually adopts a philosophy of aestheticism, greatly valuing beauty and art. Stephen is essentially Joyce's alter ego, and many of the events of Stephen's life mirror events from Joyce's own youth. His name and struggle for autonomy are a reference to the classic Dedalus myth. 

Simon Dedalus - Stephen's father, an impoverished former medical student with a strong sense of Irish patriotism. Sentimental about his past, Simon Dedalus frequently reminisces about his youth. Loosely based on Joyce's own father and their relationship. 

Emma Cleary - Stephen's beloved, the young girl to whom he is fiercely attracted over the course of many years. Stephen constructs Emma as an ideal of femininity, even though he does not know her well. 

Charles Stewart Parnell - An Irish political leader who is not an actual character in the novel, but whose death influences many of its characters. Parnell had powerfully led the Irish National Party until he was condemned for having an affair with a married woman. 

Cranly - Stephen's best friend at the university, in whom he confides his thoughts and feelings. In this sense, Cranly represents a secular confessor for Stephen. Eventually, Cranly begins to encourage Stephen to conform to the wishes of his family and to try harder to fit in with his peers—advice that Stephen fiercely resents. Towards the conclusion, he bore witness to Stephen's famous aesthetic philosophy.

==Synopsis==

The early youth of Stephen Dedalus is recounted at a vocabulary level of Stephen's own as he grows, in a voice not his own but sensitive to his feelings. The reader experiences Stephen's fears and bewilderment as he comes to terms with the world in a series of disjointed episodes. Stephen attends school at Jesuit-run Clongowes Wood College, where the apprehensive, intellectually gifted boy suffers the ridicule of his classmates while he learns the schoolboy codes of behaviour. While he cannot grasp their significance, at a Christmas dinner he is witness to the social, political, and religious tensions in Ireland involving Charles Stewart Parnell that drives bitter wedges between members of his family, leaving Stephen with doubts over which social institutions he can place his faith in. Back at Clongowes, word spreads that a number of older boys have been caught "smugging"; discipline is tightened, and the Jesuits increase use of corporal punishment. Stephen is strapped when one of his instructors believes he has broken his glasses to avoid studying; prodded by his classmates, Stephen works up the courage to complain to the rector Father Conmee, who assures him there will be no such recurrence, leaving Stephen with a sense of triumph.

Stephen's father's debts see the family to Dublin proper, and Stephen realizes he will likely not return to Clongowes. Thanks to a scholarship obtained for him by Father Conmee, Stephen is able to attend Belvedere College, where he excels academically and becomes a class leader. Stephen squanders a large cash prize from school, and begins to see prostitutes, as a distance grows between him and his drunken father.

Stephen Dedalus has an aesthetic epiphany along Dollymount Strand.

As Stephen abandons himself to sensual pleasures, his class is taken on a religious retreat, where the boys sit through sermons; Stephen pays especial attention to those on pride, guilt, punishment, and the Last Judgment. He feels the words directed at himself, and overwhelmed comes to desire forgiveness. Overjoyed at his return to the Church, he devotes himself to acts of repentance, though they soon devolve to mere acts of routine with his thoughts elsewhere than on spiritual matters. His devotion comes to the attention of the Jesuits, and they encourage him to consider entering the Jesuit priesthood. Stephen takes time to consider, during which he has a crisis of faith, a conflict between his spiritual beliefs and his aesthetic ambitions. Along Dollymount Strand he spots a girl wading, and has an epiphany in which he is overcome with the desire to find a way to express her beauty with his writing.

While a student at University College Dublin, Stephen grows increasingly wary of the institutions around him—Church, school, politics, and family. In the midst of the disintegration of his family's fortunes, his father berates him and his mother urges him to return to the Church. An increasingly dry, humourless Stephen explains his alienation from the Church and the aesthetic theory he has developed to friends, who find they cannot accept Stephen's positions. Ireland, Stephen comes to realize, is too restricted to allow him to express himself fully as an artist—he will have to leave, he decides, and sets his mind on self-imposed exile, but not without declaring in his diary his ties to his homeland:

==Style==

The novel mixes third-person narrative with free indirect speech, which allows both identification with and distance from Stephen. The narrator refrains from judgment—as contrast, Stephen Heros omniscient narrator informs the reader as Stephen sets out to write "some pages of sorry verse", while Portrait gives only Stephen's attempts, leaving evaluation to the reader.

The novel is written primarily as a third-person narrative with minimal dialogue until the final chapter. This chapter includes dialogue-intensive scenes alternately involving Stephen, Davin, and Cranly. An example of such a scene is the one in which Stephen posits his complex Thomist aesthetic theory in an extended dialogue. Joyce employs first-person narration for Stephen's journal entries in the concluding pages of the novel to suggest that Stephen has finally found his own voice and no longer needs to absorb the stories of others. Bulson (2006:51) Joyce fully employs the free indirect style to demonstrate Stephen's intellectual development from his childhood though his education, to his increasing independence and ultimate exile from Ireland as a young man. The style of the work progresses through each of its five chapters, with the complexity of language and Stephen's consequent ability to comprehend the world around him gradually increasing. Bulson (2006:50) The book's opening pages communicate Stephen's first stirrings of consciousness when he is a child. Throughout the work, language and prose are used to describe indirectly the state of mind of the protagonist, and the subjective effect of the events of his life. Hence the fungible length of some scenes and chapters, where Joyce's intent was to capture the subjective experience through language, rather than to present the actual experience by prose narrative. The writing style is notable also for Joyce's omission of quotation marks; he indicated dialogue by beginning a paragraph with a dash, as is commonly used by French, Spanish or Russian publications. The novel, like all of Joyce's published works, is not dedicated to anyone.

==Analysis==

To literary scholar Hugh Kenner, "every theme in the entire life-work of James Joyce is stated on the first two pages of the Portrait". The highly condensed recounting of young Stephen's growing consciousness "enact the entire action in microcosm. An Aristotelian catalogue of senses, faculties, and mental activities is counterpointed against the unfolding of the infant conscience", and themes that run through Joyce's later novels find expression there.

The myth of Daedalus and Icarus has parallels in the story structure, and gives Stephen his surname.

The epigraph quotes from Ovid's Metamorphoses: the inventor Daedalus, who has built a labyrinth to imprison the Minotaur, and his son Icarus whom are forbidden to leave the Island of Crete by its King, Minos. Daedalus, "turning his mind to unknown arts", fashions wings of birds' feathers and wax with which he and his son flee their island prison. Icarus flies so close to the sun that the wax on his pair melts and he plummets into the sea. To A. Nicholas Fargnoli and Michael Patrick Gillespie the epigraph parallels the heights and depths that end and begin each chapter, and can be seen to proclaim the interpretive freedom of the text.

A Portrait belongs to the genres of Bildungsroman, the novel of education or coming of age, and Künstlerroman, a story of artistic development, of which A Portrait is the primary example in English. Bulson (2006:49) 

===Autobiography===
Whilst in Stephen Hero Joyce wrote a more directly autobiographical novel, including people and events because he had personally experienced them, in A Portrait he refines this approach by selectively drawing on life events and reflecting them through the consciousness of Stephen Dedalus, a fictional character. Bulson (2006:50) 

==Reception==

A Portrait won Joyce a reputation for his literary skills, and a patron in business manager at The Egoist Harriet Shaw Weaver. In 1917 H. G. Wells wrote that "one believes in Stephen Dedalus as one believes in few characters in fiction", while warning readers of Joyce's "cloacal obsession"—his insistence on the portrayal of bodily functions that Victorian morality had banished from print, and which has found numerous detractors of the book.

==Adaptations==
A film version, adapted for cinema by Judith Rascoe and directed by Joseph Strick, was released in 1977. It featured Bosco Hogan as Stephen Dedalus and T. P. McKenna as Simon Dedalus. John Gielgud played Father Arnall, the priest whose lengthy sermon on Hell terrifies the teenage Stephen. 

Hugh Leonard's stage work Stephen D is an adaptation of Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man and Stephen Hero. It was first produced at the Gate Theatre, during the Dublin Theatre Festival of 1962. Irish Playography, Stephen D by Hugh Leonard retrieved 7 July 2013 

==Notes==

==References==

===Works cited===

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 

* 

== Further reading ==

* Attridge, Derek, ed. The Cambridge Companion to James Joyce, 2nd edition, Cambridge UP, 2004. ISBN 0-521-54553-6.
* Bloom, Harold. James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. New York: Chelsea House, 1988. ISBN 1-55546-020-8.
* Brady, Philip and James F. Carens, eds. Critical Essays on James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. New York: G. K. Hall, 1998. ISBN 978-0-7838-0035-6.
* Doherty, Gerald. Pathologies of Desire: The Vicissitudes of the Self in James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. New York: Peter Lang, 2008. ISBN 978-0-8204-9735-8.
* Empric, Julienne H. The Woman in the Portrait: The Transforming Female in James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. San Bernardino, CA: Borgo Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0-89370-193-2.
* Epstein, Edmund L. The Ordeal of Stephen Dedalus: The Conflict of Generations in James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1971. ISBN 978-0-8093-0485-1 .
* Harkness, Marguerite. Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man: Voices of the Text. Boston: Twayne, 1989. ISBN 978-0-8057-8125-0.
* Morris, William E. and Clifford A. Nault, eds. Portraits of an Artist: A Casebook on James Joyce's Portrait. New York: Odyssey, 1962.
* Seed, David. James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1992. ISBN 978-0-312-08426-4.
* Staley, Thomas F. and Bernard Benstock, ed. Approaches to Joyce's Portrait: Ten Essays. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1976. ISBN 978-0-82-293331-1. 
* Thornton, Weldon. The Antimodernism of Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse UP, 1994. ISBN 978-0-8156-2587-2.
* 
* Wollaeger, Mark A., ed. James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man: A Casebook. Oxford and New York: Oxford UP, 2003. ISBN 978-0-19-515075-9.
* Yoshida, Hiromi. Joyce & Jung: The "Four Stages of Eroticism" in A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. New York: Peter Lang, 2007. ISBN 978-0-8204-6913-3.

==External links==

* 
** Hypertextual, self-referential version based on the Project Gutenberg edition, from an Imperial College London website
* Digitized copy of the first edition from Internet Archive
* Study guide from SparkNotes


