[[An Enemy of the People]]

Manuscript title page of Ibsen's En folkefiende, 1882

An Enemy of the people (original Norwegian title: En folkefiende) is an 1882 play by Norwegian playwright Henrik Ibsen. Ibsen wrote it in response to the public outcry against his play Ghosts, which at that time was considered scandalous. Ghosts had challenged the hypocrisy of Victorian morality and was deemed indecent for its veiled references to syphilis.

Upon completion of the play, Ibsen wrote to his publisher in Copenhagen, Denmark : "I am still uncertain as to whether I should call it a comedy or a straight drama. It may many traits of comedy, but it also is based on a serious idea." 

==Plot Overview==
===Act I===
The Play opens in Dr. Stockmann's household. Mrs. Stockmann is entertaing the dinner guests. As the evening progresses The Mayor (also Dr. Stockmann's Brother) and Horvstad (the editor of the newspaper) have come to the house. Dr. Stockmann and his two sons Elif and Morten have come home from a walk. As they all gather in the house The Mayor needs to confront his brother about an article regarding the Town Health Spa Baths and the rumors that have been raised about them being contaminated. The Brothers get into an argument about their positions on hiding the truth and shaping the truth to get the results that are convenient. Petra (The Doctor's Daughter) brings in the letter that her father has been waiting for, after Dr. Stockmann reading the letter he discover his suspicions were right and the water from the baths is in fact contaminated. Hovstad now agrees to print the article and unfold the story. This will bring a great deal of attention to the Baths and possibly will be the end of them (which will have repercussions on the towns economy). But Dr. Stockmann is overwhelmed with all that has happen and quickly believes he is the savior of the town.

===Act II===
The next morning in Dr. Stockmann house. Mrs. Stockmann gives the news to her husband that his brother Peter will stop by to talk about the baths. Meantime Morten Kill (Dr. Stockmann's Father in law) stops by the house to congratulate The Doctor on his discovery and what will this mean to the Town. Hovstad and Alasken (the printer) stop by the house as well to reinforce their commitment with the Dr. and extend their gratitude. The new alliance between the paper and Dr. Stockmann have a deeper interest than just the baths. The Paper wants to confront the government of the town and expose the corruption that happens behind closed doors, and this opportunity is a way to start.

Peter (The Mayor) enters the house, and everything becomes tense. Peter tells Dr. Stockmann that if he proceeds with this article and exposes this information to the town, he will be partially culpable for the ruin of the town. Peter accuses Dr. Stockmann of being selfish and not thinking of the bigger picture. He is encouraging Dr. Stockmann to retract himself from this article and to solve this problem in a more quiet way. The Doctor refuses his brother propositions and to which the mayor reiterates that they will be terrible consequences for him and his family.

===Act III===
In the newspaper office Hovstad and Billing discuss the Pros and Cons of having Dr. Stockmann article bashing on the reputation of the government of the town. They are ready to proceed and help bring the privilege classes down. Dr. Stockmann comes into the office and tells them to print the article, but at this moment the whole office has a change of heart and are questioning how valuable is it really to expose the government and the towns baths in this way. They are realizing that printing this article will do more damage than help the situation. Instead the paper is now on the side of the mayor, and have decided to print a statement of him talking about the baths and how good they are. Dr. Stockmann out of desperation, decides that he doesn't need the paper to print anything and that he can fight this battle on his own. Dr. Stockmann decides to call in a town meeting to and spread the information away. Mrs. Stockman is present during all of this, and although she knows that her husband is making some extreme decisions and is risking his reputation, she stands by his side.

===Act IV===
At the town meeting in Capitan Horster's house. Dr. Stockmann is about to read his water report to the townspeople. Billing, The family, The mayor, Alasken, Hovstad are there. Alasken is elected the chair of the meeting serving as a mediator. What ends up happening is that Alasken is trying to sabotage the Doctor and stopping him for communicating the report. When he finally gets a chance to speak, he talks about the contamination of the water but also gets into the minorities of people and how they are the ones that have the knowledge, he starts talking to the town about education and corruption. The town feels insulted by this accusations and anger starts growing in the room. By the end of the meeting the town has rebel as a mob to Dr. Stockmann and have marked him as the enemy of the people. The town has exile Dr. Stockmann from the town.

===Act V===
The morning after at Dr. Stockmann's study. The windows of the house have been smashed. The town has turn against the family, and everyone they know won't help them. The landlord has evicted them from the house, Petra got fired from school for having (progressive opinions), Peter comes to the hose to present Dr. Stockmann with a letter of termination of contract from the Board of Directors of the Baths and a manifest from the Householders association stating that no one should hire Dr. Stockmann in this town again.

On the other side Morten Kill just bought and handful of shares of the baths, expecting that because is his tannery that is causing all the contamination in the water, Dr. Stockmann will back off and let the issue go. Because now the family's money is also at jeopardy if he continuous this battle. Dr. Stockmann refuses Morten Kill suggestions, and also ignores Peter's advice of leaving town for a few months. Dr. Stockmann alienates everyone and stays true to his principals, even when they mean standing alone with them. Dr. Stockmann knows that his family will always be by his side, and decides to accepts his fate and become the enemy of the people if that is what it takes to do things right.

==Characters==
Édouard Vuillard, An Enemy of the People, Program for Théâtre de l'Oeuvre, November 1893
* Doctor Thomas Stockmann, the medical officer at the new Municipal Baths and the protagonist.
* Mrs. Katherine Stockmann, his wife.
* Petra, their daughter, a teacher.
* Ejlif & Morten, their sons.
* Peter Stockmann, Doctor Stockmann's elder brother; he is the mayor of the town and thus Thomas' supervisor.
* Morten Kiil, a tanner (Mrs. Stockmann's father), also known as the Badger.
* Hovstad, editor of The Peoples' Messenger, the local paper.
* Billing, sub-editor.
* Captain Horster, a shipmaster going to America and a friend of Thomas Stockmann.
* Aslaksen, a publisher (also a character in The League of Youth).
* Men of various conditions and occupations, a few women, and a troop of schoolboys – the audience at a public meeting.

==Themes==
In An Enemy of the People, speaking the language of comic exaggeration through the mouth of his spokesman, the disillusioned idealist Doctor Thomas Stockmann, Ibsen puts into very literal terms the theme of the play: It is true that ideas grow stale and platitudinous, but one may go one step further and say flatly that truths die. According to Stockmann, there are no absolute principles of either wisdom or morality. In this Ibsen is referring indirectly to the reception of his previous plays. For example, the commandment "honor thy father and thy mother" referred to in Ghosts is not simply either true or false. It may have been a truth once and a falsehood today. Krutch, Joseph Wood. "Modernism" in Modern Drama: A Definition and an Estimate. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1953. Page 11. As Stockmann puts it in his excited harangue to his political enemies: "Truths are by no means the wiry Methuselahs some people think them. A normally constituted truth lives—let us say—as a rule, seventeen or eighteen years; at the outside twenty; very seldom more. And truths so patriarchal as that are always shockingly emaciated."

==Adaptations==
This classic play was adapted by Arthur Miller in the 1950s in a production that opened at the Broadhurst Theater on December 28, 1950. It starred Academy Award winner Fredric March and his wife Florence Eldridge as well as Morris Carnovsky; future Oscar winner Rod Steiger was a "townsperson." Miller's adaptation was presented on National Educational Television in 1966, in a production starring James Daly. It was also made into a movie of the same name in 1978, starring Steve McQueen. The BBC then cast Robert Urquhart as "Tom Stockman" in their 1980 TV version, adapting the story and the cast names to reflect it now being set in a Scottish town. BBC TV's 1980 version of the novel, set in Scotland: IMDB.com website. Retrieved on January 13, 2008. 

A version was produced for Australian television in 1958. http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3501848/ 

Satyajit Ray's 1989 film Ganashatru, was also based on this play. In 1990, PBS produced the play for their show American Playhouse, starring William Anton and John Glover. 

In 2007 Ouriel Zohar creates his troupe Compagnie Ouriel Zohar Site de la compagnie Ouriel Zohar with An Enemy of the People in Paris, an adaptation for two actors only. First performance in Paris, then Fréjus, Besançon in 2008, Liège Belgium Minsk Belarus Valleyfield in Canada 2009, Porto Heli in Greece in 2010.

A stage version starring Richard Thomas and Boyd Gaines opened in New York in September 2012.

An Enemy of the People (with the subtitle The strongest one is the one who stands alone)—a Norwegian film issued in 2004 and directed by Erik Skjoldbjærg—is an adaptation of Ibsen's play.

The play was the indirect inspiration for the blockbuster movie Jaws. 

In early 2013, an adaptation was made in Egypt entitled "عدو الشعب". Translated from Arabic, the title is "Enemy of the people" or "A Public Enemy". It was a theater production organized and directed by Nora Amin (who herself plays the role of Doctor Stockman's wife) and starring Tarek El-Dewiri as Doctor Thomas Stockman. It was translated into colloquial Arabic and featured a rock-themed soundtrack played live on-set. It received various positive reviews and was jointly sponsored by the Norwegian Embassy in Cairo and the Ibsen Studies Center in Norway. The show came at a time where Egypt and the capital, Cairo are plunged into deep turmoil and the play carries serious political relevance in post-revolutionary Egypt.
 Al-Ahram Weekly article, English newspaper in Egypt, retrieved 2/10/2013. 
 Al-Ahram Hebdo article, French newspaper in Egypt, retrieved 2/10/2013. 

In May 2013, the Young Vic theatre in London presented a version by David Harrower titled Public Enemy, directed by Richard Jones. 

The play was staged in 2013, between October and December, in the Teatro da Comuna in Lisbon. Teatro da Comuna 

In January 2014, the play was adapted into Mandarin by Nelson Chia, artistic director of theater company Nine Years Theatre, and performed at the M1 Fringe Festival in Singapore.

==Audio==

This Audio Book of An Enemy of the People is translated into English by Author: Robert Farquharson Sharp. The source was made available to the public domain thanks to Librivox. This Recording was made in 2013-05-02.

 ACT I An Enemy of the People Act 1 Henrik Ibsen 
 ACT II An Enemy of the People Act 2 Henrik Ibsen 
 ACT III An Enemy of the People Act 3 Henrik Ibsen 
 ACT IV An Enemy of the People Act 4 Henrik Ibsen 
 ACT V An Enemy of the People Act 5 Henrik Ibsen 

==Notes==

==External links==

* 
* An Enemy of the People: Study Guide
* Spark Notes
* 
* 
* Ibsen.net


