[[Andhra Pradesh]]

Andhra Pradesh () is one of the 29 states of India, situated on the country's southeastern coast. The state is the eighth largest state in India covering an area of 160205 km2. According to 2011 census, the state is tenth largest by population with 49,386,799 inhabitants. The state is bordered to Telangana and Chhattisgarh in the north, Tamil Nadu in the south, Orissa in the northeast, Karnataka in the west and waterbody of Bay of Bengal in the east. A small enclave of 30 km2 of Yanam, a district of Pondicherry, lies in the Godavari delta to the northeast of the state. 

The state has the second longest coastline of 972 km among all the states of India, only second to Gujarat. There are two regions in the state namely Coastal Andhra and Rayalaseema and hence, the two regions are more often referred as Seemandhra. There are 13 districts with 9 in Coastal Andhra and 4 in Rayalaseema. Visakhapatnam is the largest city and Hyderabad is the joint capital of both Andhra Pradesh and Telangana states for a period of 10 years. 

The state is endowed with a variety of physio-graphic features ranging from Eastern Ghats, Nallamala Forest, Coastal plains to deltas of two major rivers of Krishna and Godavari. The state is largest producer of rice and hence, nicknamed as Rice Bowl of India. Telugu, which is one of the classical languages in India is the official language of the state. It is also rich in culture with various pilgrimage destinations of importance like Tirumala temple, alongside a host of historical monuments to the tourists.

== History ==

The Andhras trace their history to the vedic age. Andhra was mentioned in the Sanskrit epics such as Aitareya Brahmana (800 BCE). According to Aitareya Brahmana of the Rig veda, Andhras left the North India and migrated to South India. 

The roots of the Telugu language have been seen on inscriptions found near the Guntur district and from others dating to the rule of Renati Cholas in the fifth century CE. 

=== Early history ===

==== Satavahana empire ====
The Early Satavahanas ruled Andhra. The puranas refer to Satavahanas as Andhra Bhrityas. The Purāṇas list 30 Andhra rulers. Many are known from their coins and inscriptions as well. Satavahanas made Amaravati as their capital. 

Simuka (c.230–207 BCE)
After becoming independent around 230 BCE, Simuka, the founder of the dynasty, conquered the present-day Maharashtra and parts of Madhya Pradesh (including Malwa). He was succeeded by his brother Kanha (or Krishna) (r. 207–189 BCE), who further extended his state to the present day Andhra Pradesh. Later, Simuka made Srikakulam as his capital. 

Satakarni (c.180–124 BCE)
Early Satakarni issue, Maharashtra – Vidarbha type.
Satavahana 1 BCE coin inscribed in Brahmi: "(Sataka)Nisa". British Museum

His successor Sātakarnī I was the sixth ruler of the Satavahana. He is said to have ruled for 56 years. The Mauryans extended their rule over Andhra in the fourth century BCE. With the fall of the Maurya Empire in the third century BCE, the Satavahanas became independent. After the decline of the Satavahanas in 220 CE, the Ikshvaku dynasty, Pallavas, Ananda Gotrikas, Rashtrakutas, Vishnukundinas, Eastern Chalukyas, and Cholas ruled the land. G. Durga Prasad, History of the Andhras up to 1565 AD, P.G. Publishers, Guntur, p. 116 

==== Ikshvakus ====
Andhra Ikshvakus (Sanskrit इक्ष्वाकु, Telugu ఇక్ష్వాకులు) were one of the earliest recorded ruling dynasties of the Krishna-Guntur regions of Andhra Pradesh.They ruled the eastern Andhra country along the Krishna river during the later half of the second century CE. Puranas called Andhra Ikshvakus Shri Parvatiya Andhras. Andhra Ikshvaku inscriptions Their capital was Vijayapuri (Nagarjunakonda). It is a strong common belief among some historians that Andhra Ikshvakus were related to the mythological Ikshvakus, while some believe Andhra Ikshvakus seem to be a local tribe who adopted the title. Ancient India, A History Textbook for Class XI, Ram Sharan Sharma, National Council of Educational Research and Training, India , pp 212 

Archaeological evidence has suggested that the Andhra Ikshvakus immediately succeeded the Satavahanas in the Krishna river valley. Ikshvakus have left inscriptions at Nagarjunakonda, Jaggayyapeta, Amaravati and Bhattiprolu. 

==== Pallavas ====
During third century AD, there was utter political and military confusion in the coastal Andhra due to the invasion of the Abhiras and their allies on the last Ikshvaku remnants and the rise of the Brihatphalayanas, the Anandagotras and the Salankayanas on the other. Simha Varma of the Manchikallu stone inscription establishes the independent rule of the Pallavas in parts of the Krishna valley of Andhra Pradesh.

During the reign of Maharaja Sivaskanda Varma of the Mayidavolu, Hirahadagalli, the early Pallavas became dominant power in the first quarter of the fourth century AD Sivaskanda Varma was the first great ruler of the early Pallavas. He extended his dominions from the Krishna in the north to the south Pennar in the south and to the Bellary district in the West. He performed the Aswamedha and other Vedic sacrifices.

Most of the Pallava Prakrit and Sanskrit charters from the southern Andhra country intimately connects them with the history of southern Andhra. The influence of the Pallavas was still felt by Andhra till it was swept by the Western Chalukyan invasion led by Pulakesin II in the first quarter of the seventh century AD. The Pallavas were not a recognized political power before the 2 century AD. Pallavas were originally executive officers under the Satavahana kings. 

==== Vishnukundins ====
Since the fall of the Ikshvakus, the Vishnukundins were the first great dynasty, which held sway way over the entire Andhra country including Kalinga and parts of Telangana and played an important and imperial role in the history of Deccan during the fifth and sixth century AD. 

==== Salankayanas ====
The Salankayanas were an ancient dynasty that ruled the Andhra region between Godavari and Krishna with their capital as Vengi, modern Pedavegi near Eluru in West Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh, India's from 300 to 440 AD. They were Brahmins and their name is derived from their symbol and gotra name, which stood for Nandi (the bull of Shiva). Ancient Indian History and civilization By S. N. Sen 

=== Modern history ===
Inspired by their success, the Vijayanagara Empire, one of the greatest empires in the history of Andhra Pradesh and India, was founded by Harihara and Bukka, who served as treasury officers of the Kakatiyas of Warangal. Robert Sewell, A Forgotten Empire (Vijayanagar): A contribution to the history of India, Chapter 2 Gutenberg.org In 1347 CE, an independent Muslim state, the Bahmani Sultanate, was established in south India by Ala-ud-Din Bahman Shah in a revolt against the Delhi Sultanate. The Qutb Shahi dynasty held sway over the Andhra country for about two hundred years from the early part of the 16th century to the end of the seventeenth century. 

In Colonial India, Northern Circars became part of the British Madras Presidency. Eventually this region emerged as the Coastal Andhra region. Later the Nizam rulers of Hyderabad ceded five territories to the British which eventually emerged as Rayalaseema region. The Nizams retained control of the interior provinces as the princely state of Hyderabad, acknowledging British rule in return for local autonomy. However, Komaram Bheem, a tribal leader, started his fight against the erstwhile Asaf Jahi Dynasty for the liberation of Hyderabad State. Meanwhile, the French occupied Yanam, in the Godavari delta, and (save for periods of British control) would hold it until 1954.

India became independent from the United Kingdom in 1947. The Nizam wanted to retain the independence of the Princely Hyderabad State from India, but the people of the region launched a movement to join the Indian Union. The state of Hyderabad was forcibly joined to the Republic of India with Operation Polo in 1948. 

=== Post independence ===

Hyderabad state in 1956 (in lime-green)
Telangana (in white) and Andhra Pradesh (in yellow) after bifurcation

In an effort to gain an independent state based on the linguistic basis and protect the interests of the Telugu-speaking people of Madras State, Potti Sreeramulu fasted until death in 1952. As Madras city became bone of contention, in 1949 JVP committee report stated "Andhra Province could be formed provided the Andhras give up their claim on the city of Madras (now Chennai)". After Potti Sreeramulu's death, the Telugu speaking areas i.e., Andhra state was carved out of Madras State on 1 October 1953, with Kurnool as its capital city. 

The State Reorganisation Commission had recommended that the residual Hyderabad State continue as a separate entity. On the basis of Agreement called Gentlemen Agreement on 1 November 1956, the States Reorganisation Act formed Andhra Pradesh by merging the Andhra State with the Telugu-speaking areas of the already existing Hyderabad State. Hyderabad was made the capital of the new state. The Marathi-speaking areas of Hyderabad State merged with Bombay State and the Kannada-speaking areas were merged with Mysore State.

Bifurcation of state

On February 2014, Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 bill was passed by the Parliament of India for the formation of Telangana state comprising ten districts. Hyderabad shall remain as a joint capital for 10 years for both the states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Telangana is India’s 29th state as Rajya Sabha passes Bill amidst chaos The new state of Telangana came into existence on 2 June 2014 after the approval from the President of India. Formation of new state named as Telangana from Andhra Pradeshis not considered as amendment to constitution as per article 3 and 4 of Constitution of India. 

==Geography==

Krishna River at Srisailam
The Mouth of the Godavari River (East) emptying into the Bay of Bengal

Geographically, Andhra Pradesh is bestowed with two mighty river systems of Krishna and Godavari. Its varied topography ranging from the hills of Eastern Ghats and Nallamallas to the shores of Bay of Bengal supports varied ecotypes, rich diversity of flora and fauna. The state has two regions Coastal Andhra and Rayalaseema. The plains to the east of Eastern Ghats form the Eastern coastal plains. The coastal plains are for the most part of delta regions formed by the Godavari, Krishna, and Penna rivers. The Eastern Ghats are discontinuous and individual sections have local names. The Eastern Ghats are a major dividing line in the state's geography. The Kadapa Basin formed by two arching branches of the Eastern Ghats is a mineral-rich area. The Ghats become more pronounced towards the south and extreme north of the coast. Most of the coastal plains are put to intense agricultural use. The Rayalaseema region has semi-arid conditions.

=== Natural vegetation ===

Kambalakonda Wildlife Sanctuary, Visakhapatnam

Andhra Pradesh Forest Department deals with protection, conservation and management of forests. The total forest cover of the state after the bifurcation is left with an area of 22,862 km2. The forest in the state can be broadly divided into four major biotic provinces. They are
#Deccan Plateau
#Central Plateau
#Eastern Highland
#East Coastal Plains

Eastern Ghats region is home to dense tropical forests, while the vegetation becomes sparse as the Ghats give way to the Deccan Plateau, where shrub vegetation is more common. These ghats has rich biological diversity with wide variety of plants, birds and lesser forms of animal life. The vegetation found in the state is largely of dry deciduous type with a mixture of Teak, Terminalias, Dalbergias, Pterocarpus, Anogeissus etc.
The State possesses some rare and endemic plants like Cycas beddomei, Pterocarpus santalinus, Terminalia pallida, Syzygium alternifolium, Shorea talura, Shorea tumburgia, Psilotum nudam etc. 

The varied diversity of fauna includes tigers, panthers, hyenas, black bucks, cheetals, sambars, sea turtles and a number of birds and reptiles. The estuaries of river Godavari and Krishna support rich mangrove forests with Fishing Cat and Otters as key stone species. 

==Climate==
The climate of Andhra Pradesh varies considerably, depending on the geographical region. Monsoons play a major role in determining the climate of the state. Summers last from March to June. In the coastal plain, the summer temperatures are generally higher than the rest of the state, with temperature ranging between 20 °C and 41 °C.

July to September is the season for tropical rains in Andhra Pradesh. The state receives heavy rainfall from the Southwest Monsoon during these months. About one third of the total rainfall in Andhra Pradesh is brought by the Northeast Monsoon. October and November see low-pressure systems and tropical cyclones form in the Bay of Bengal which, along with the Northeast Monsoon, bring rains to the southern and coastal regions of the state. November, December, January, and February are the winter months in Andhra Pradesh. Since the state has a long coastal belt the winters are not very cold. The range of winter temperature is generally 12 °C to 30 °C. 

==Demographics==

Telugu is the official language of the state, spoken by 91.00%. Other linguistic minority groups are Urdu (7.01%), Hindi (1.05%), and Tamil (1.01%). Other languages spoken in Andhra Pradesh by less than 1% are Kannada (0.74%) and Oriya (0.64%). Languages spoken by less than 0.2% of the population include Malayalam (0.09%), Gujarati (0.02%), Bengali (0.05%), Gorkhali/Nepali (0.03%), Punjabi (0.02%) and Sindhi (0.01%). 

Andhra Pradesh ranks tenth of all Indian States in the Human Development Index scores with a score of 0.416. The National Council of Applied Economic Research district analysis in 2001 reveals that Krishna, West Godavari and Chittoor are the three districts in rural AP with the highest Human Development Index scores in ascending order.

The data show that the poor make up 16.3% of the total population in rural AP, and expenditure on consumption is around 13.5% of the total consumption expenditure. The female literacy rate is 0.66 compared to male literacy rate in rural AP. The district-wise variations for poverty ratio are high and low for the ratio of female/male literacy rate. The gender gap in illiteracy is one of the issues being addressed by Asmita Resource Centre for Women, an Indian NGO based in Andhra Pradesh that works to better the socio-economic status of women and communities in India.

Languages

The official language of Andhra Pradesh is Telugu. The Minister of Tourism and Culture has issued declaration of Telugu language as Classical Language. Other languages often spoken in the state include Hindi, Tamil, Kannada and Oriya. 

==Religions==

Andhra Pradesh is the state that houses people of diverse faiths. Although mostly Hindu(91%), Andhra Pradesh has a significant Muslim minority(7%) and smaller amounts of Christians, Jains, Sikhs, and Buddhists.

Hinduism

Andhra Pradesh is home to Shankaracharya of Pushpagiri Peetham. Other Hindu saints include Yogi Sri Potuluri Virabrahmendra Swami, who was born in the Vishwabrahmin (goldsmith) caste with Brahmin and Dalit disciples, Satya Saibaba and many others.

Andhra Pradesh has several Hindu shrines. Most important and richest of them is Tirupati Tirumala Devasthanams.

Christianity

Most Telugu Christians are Protestant belonging to major Indian Protestant denominations such as the Church of South India, the Andhra Evangelical Lutheran Church, the Samavesam of Telugu Baptist Churches and several others.

Buddhism

Mahayana

Rock-cut Buddha statue at Bojjanakonda near Anakapalle, Visakhapatnam
Scholars have suggested that the Prajñāpāramitā Sutras, the earliest Mahayana Sutras, Williams, Paul. Buddhist Thought. Routledge, 2000, pages 131. Williams, Paul. Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations 2nd edition. Routledge, 2009, pg. 47. developed among the Mahāsāṃghika along the Krishna River in Andhra country. Guang Xing. The Concept of the Buddha: Its Evolution from Early Buddhism to the Trikaya Theory. 2004. pp. 65–66 "Several scholars have suggested that the Prajnaparamita probably developed among the Mahasamghikas in Southern India, in the Andhra country, on the Krsna River." A.K. Warder holds that "the Mahāyāna originated in the south of India and almost certainly in the Andhra country." Warder, A.K. Indian Buddhism. 2000. p. 313 Anthony Barber and Sree Padma note that "historians of Buddhist thought have been aware for quite some time that such pivotally important Mahayana Buddhist thinkers as Nāgārjuna, Dignaga, Candrakīrti, Aryadeva, and Bhavaviveka, among many others, formulated their theories while living in Buddhist communities in Andhra." Padma, Sree. Barber, Anthony W. Buddhism in the Krishna River Valley of Andhra. SUNY Press 2008, pg. 1. They note that the ancient Buddhist sites in the lower Krishna Valley, including Amaravati, Nagarjunakonda and Jaggayyapeta "can be traced to at least the third century BCE, if not earlier." Padma, Sree. Barber, Anthony W. Buddhism in the Krishna River Valley of Andhra. SUNY Press 2008, pg. 2. Sri Singha, Savari, Maitripa and Virupa lived and taught in the Andhra region for some portion of their lives or were in some cases permanent residents. Padma, Sree. Barber, Anthony W. Buddhism in the Krishna River Valley of Andhra. SUNY Press 2008, pp. 159–160. Ronald Davidson calls the Krishna River valley "a site of extraordinary Buddhist activity for almost a thousand years." Davidson, Ronald. Tibetan Renaissance. Columbia 2005, pp. 29. 

==Administration==

District Court, Guntur

Andhra Pradesh has a Vidhan Sabha (legislative assembly, lower house) of 175 seats, and a Vidhan Parishad (legislative council, upper house) of 54 members. In the Parliament of India Andhra Pradesh has 11 in the Rajya Sabha, the Upper House, and 25 in the Lok Sabha, the Lower House. Currently, Andhra Pradesh is administratively divided into 13 districts.

Andhra Pradesh had a series of governments headed by Indian National Congress (INC) Party until 1982. Nandamuri Taraka Rama Rao is the founder of Telugu Desam party and served as the first chief minister from the party. N. Chandrababu Naidu held the record for the longest serving chief minister (1995 to 2004). P. V. Narasimha Rao served as the chief minister of the state from 1971 to 1973, and went on to become the Prime Minister of India in 1991. The first Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh was Neelam Sanjiva Reddy who later served as President of India. 

=== Politics ===

Until 1962, the CPI, along with socialist parties namely Praja Socialist Party and Krishi Lok Party played an important role in the 1950s. In the 1967 state assembly elections, all socialist parties were eliminated and CPI lost opposition party status. In 1983, the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) won the state elections and N.T. Rama Rao became the chief minister of the state for the first time. This broke the long time single party monopoly enjoyed by the INC from 1956 until 1982. The 1989 elections ended the rule of NTR, with the INC party returning to power with Marri Chenna Reddy at the helm. He was replaced by Janardhan Reddy in 1990, who was replaced by Kotla Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy in 1992.

In 1994, Andhra Pradesh gave a mandate to the Telugu Desam Party again, and NTR became the chief minister again. Nara Chandrababu Naidu, the son-in-law of NTR, came to power with the backing of a majority of the MLAs. The Telugu Desam Party won both the assembly and Lok Sabha election in 1999 under the leadership of Chandrababu Naidu. In the ensuing elections the party lost power to a resurgent INC and its allies and Y. S. Rajasekhar Reddy became the Chief Minister.

Y. S. Rajasekhar Reddy became Chief Minister again by fending off the Praja Rajyam Party and a major alliance of TDP, TRS, CPI and CPM. He died on 2 September 2009 in a helicopter crash. Konijeti Rosaiah, former state finance minister, became the Chief Minister on 3 September 2009. On 24 November 2010, Rosaiah submitted his resignation on the grounds of increased work pressure. Nallari Kiran Kumar Reddy was sworn in as the new Chief Minister on the following day. He then resigned his post as Chief minister after the announcement of bifurcation of the state. After President's rule is imposed in the state, the state assembly is dissolved.

In what would be the last elections held in the unified state, Telugu Desam Party got a mandate in their favor in the residuary state. Nara Chandrababu Naidu, the chief of Telugu Desam Party became Chief Minister on 8 June 2014. 

==Culture==

The early dynasties which ruled this region had their influence on the culture of the state. The state is rich in its culture in terms of religious worships, literature, dance, music, arts and architecture, spicy cuisine. Some of the notable cultural aspects include paintings of Bapu, Annamayya's songs, famous Kuchipudi dance of the state, the harvest festival Sankranti and many more fairs as well.

=== Arts, crafts and Artifacts ===

The village of Durgi is known for stone craft, producing carvings of idols in soft stone that must be exhibited in the shade because they are prone to weathering. Kalamkari is an ancient textile art form dating back to the Indus Valley Civilisation. Andhra Pradesh is famous for doll making. Dolls are made from wood, mud, dry grass, and lightweight metal alloys. Tirupati is famous for redwood carvings. Kondapalli is famous for wood toys with rich colors. The village of Etikoppaka, located in Visakhapatnam district, produces lacquered toys.

The state has many museums, which features a varied collection of ancient sculptures, paintings, idols, weapons, cutlery and inscriptions, and religious artifacts such as the Archaeological Museum at Amaravati with features relics of nearby ancient sites, Visakha Museum in Visakhapatnam displays the history of the pre-Independence, and the Victoria Jubilee Museum in Vijayawada with large a good collection of artifacts.

===Literature===

Nannayya, Tikkana, and Yerrapragada form the trinity who translated the great Sanskrit epic Mahabharata into Telugu language.

Nannayya (c. 11th century CE) was the earliest known poet and translator. He wrote the first treatise on Telugu grammar, called "Andhra Shabda Chintamani" in Sanskrit. There was no grammatical work in Telugu prior to that. Pothana is the poet who composed the classic Srimad Maha Bhagavatamu, a Telugu translation of Sri Bhagavatam, authored by Veda Vyasa in Sanskrit. The Telugu poet Vemana, a native of Kadapa, is notable for his philosophical poems. The Vijayanagara emperor Krishnadevaraya wrote Amuktamalyada.

Telugu literature after Kandukuri Veeresalingam (1848–1919) is termed as Adhunika Sahityam (Modern literature). He is known as Gadya Tikkana and was the author of Telugu social novel, Satyavati Charitam. Jnanpith Award winners include Sri Viswanatha Satya Narayana . The Andhra Pradesh native and revolutionary poet Sri Sri brought new forms of expressionism into Telugu literature. 

Other modern writers include Gunturu Seshendra Sarma (second Nobel prize nominee in literature after Rabindranath Tagore), Puttaparthi Narayanacharyulu who wrote the books Sivatandavam and Panduranga Mahatyam. Srirangam Sreenivasarao, Gurram Jashuva, Chinnayasuri, Viswanatha Satyanarayana are also notable writers.

===Art forms and festivals===

Kuchipudi, dance by Yamini Reddy
Dance:

Classical dance in Andhra can be performed by both men and women; women tend to learn it more often. Kuchipudi is the state's best-known classical dance form. The various classical dance forms (Śastriya Nrutyam) such as Kuchipudi, Andhra Natyam, Bhamakalapam, Veeranatyam and folk dances(Janapada Nrutyam) forms such as Butta bommalu, Tappeta Gullu, Lambadi, Dhimsa, Teenmar, and Chindu exists in Andhra Pradesh.

Jayapa Senani was the first person to write about the dances prevalent in Andhra Pradesh. Ntitya Ratnavali Both Desi and Margi forms of dances are included in his Sanskrit treatise Nrutya Ratnavali.

Balamuralikrishna during a concert in Kuwait on 29 March 2006
Music:

Many composers of Carnatic music like Annamacharya, Tyagaraja, Kshetrayya, and Bhadrachala Ramadas were of Telugu descent. Modern Carnatic music composers like Ghantasala and M. Balamuralikrishna are also of Telugu descent. The Telugu film industry hosts many music composers and playback singers such as S. P. Balasubrahmanyam, P.Susheela, S. Janaki, P B Srinivas. Folk songs are popular in the many rural areas of the state. Forms such as the Burra katha and Poli are still performed today. 

Harikatha:

Harikatha also called as Harikathaa Kalakshepam involves the narration of a story, intermingled with various songs relating to the story. Harikatha was originated in Andhra. Harikatha Kalakshepam is most prevalent in Andhra Pradesh even now along with Burra katha. Haridasus going round villages singing devotional songs is an age-old tradition during Dhanurmaasam preceding Sankranti festival. Ajjada Adibhatla Narayana Dasu with his Kavyas and Prabandhas has made Harikatha a special art form.

Burra katha:

Burra katha is a oral storytelling technique in the Katha tradition, performed in villages of Telangana and coastal Andhra Pradesh region. The troupe consists of one main performer and two co-performers. It is a narrative entertainment that consists of prayers, solo drama, dance, songs, poems and jokes. The topic will be either a Hindu mythological story or a contemporary social issue. 

Festivals:

Ugadi is celebrated as the Telugu New Year. People listen to Panchanga recitals by Pundits on the day of Ugadi. This process is called as Panchanga Shravanam which is an important aspect of the festival. Makara Sankranti is also a famous harvest festival which is celebrated across the state. Just like in other parts of the country, many other festivals include – Dasara, Vinayaka Chaviti, Deepavali, Vasantotsavam, Maha Shivaratri, Attla Taddi etc. Muslim festivals include Bakrid, Ramzan and Christians celebrate Christmas and Easter.

===Cuisine===

Cuisine of Andhra Pradesh is famous for the rich seasoning and lots of variety. Rice is the staple food and is used in a wide variety of dishes. Typical meal includes rice, Pappu(Dal), vegetable curry, Relishes, pickles, chutneys and Curd. A lot of spices are produced in the region and hence the cuisine of Andhra Pradesh is considered spiciest of all. Tamarind and Red Chillies are the distinct flavor of local cuisine.

Pickles and chutneys (sauces) are made from chilly, ginger, coconut and other vegetables like tomato, brinjals, Gongura are served with meals. Aavakaaya is probably the best known of the pickles. Roselle leaves (Gongura), termed as Andhra Bhakshyam (or food of Andhra). Rayalaseema region too had its own variety which includes Jonna (Jowar), Ragi roti with ragi sangati, usually served with spinach.

The coastal region of the state has abundant seafood supply. The variety of fish curry recipes are famous. It is rich and aromatic, with a liberal use of exotic spices and ghee (clarified butter). Lamb, chicken are also the most widely used meats in the non-vegetarian dishes. 

Sweets made up of milk are widely eaten. Payasam is one of them made with milk, rice or vermicelli pudding served both warm and cold. Pootharekulu, bobbattlu, mamidi tandra, kaja, Ariselu(rice based vada using jaggery) etc., are famous sweets.

==Economy==

Visakhapatnam, an important commercial hub

Andhra Pradesh ranks 13th in terms of GDP and 10th in terms of per capita GDP. The service sector of the state accounts more percentage of the gross state domestic product (GSDP). In the 2010 list by Forbes Magazine, there are several from Andhra Pradesh among the top 100 richest Indians. 

===Agriculture===
Lush green farms in Konaseema, East Godavari

Economy of the state is mainly based on Agriculture and Livestock. Andhra Pradesh is an exporter of many agricultural products and is also known as Rice Bowl of India. 
Four important rivers of India, the Godavari, Krishna, Penna, and Thungabhadra flow through the state, providing irrigation. Besides rice, farmers of this state also grow wheat, jowar, bajra, maize, minor millet, coarse grain, many varieties of pulses, oil seeds, sugarcane, cotton, Chili pepper, mango nuts and tobacco. Recently, crops used for vegetable oil production such as sunflower and peanuts have gained favour. There are many multi-state irrigation projects in development, including Godavari River Basin Irrigation Projects and Nagarjuna Sagar Dam. 

Livestock is also another profitable business which involves, rearing of cattle in an enclosed area for commercial purposes.

Fisheries contribute 10% of total fish and over 70% of the shrimp production AP top producer of shrimp: MPEDA - The Hindu of India. The geographical location of the state allows marine fishing as well as inland fish production. Marine exports from the state mainly comprises the 'Vannamei' shrimp and are expected to cross $1 billion in 2013-14. The $ Billion Andhra Shrimp exports Vizag Industrial Scan 

===Industrial sector===
alt=Front of large round building, with street and trees in front

The state banks on two major sectors – information technology and biotechnology. Visakhapatnam has emerged as the main hub of industrialization. 
The IT/ITES revenues of the city alone is at in 2012–13. The development of IT in Tier-II and Tier-III cities like Vijayawada, Kakinada and Tirupati are also improving. In the fiscal year 2012–13, Vijayawada's IT/ITeS revenues were crore while Tirupati with and Kakinada with . 

Other key sectors include, Pharma, Power, Banking & Financial, Automobile, Tourism, Textiles, Retail, Leather and Tourism also constitute in the economy of the state.

Power plants
Srisailam Dam – Hydro Electric Power Source

The state is pioneer nationwide in hydro electricity generation. Natural gas, one of the cheapest source in power generation is in abundance. 

There are both coal based and hydel power plants. Thermal power plants with total capacity of 5610 MW]] are situated in the state which includes Simhadri Super Thermal Power Plant (2000 MW) of NTPC, Rayalaseema Thermal Power Station (1050 MW), Sri Damodaram Sanjeevaiah Thermal Power Station (800 MW), Vijayawada Thermal Power Plant (1760 MW) and the Hydel power plants are having a capacity of 3693.20 MW. Ramagiri Wind mills is a wind power generation with 2 MW capacity. 

=== Natural resources ===

Andhra Pradesh is one of the store houses of Mineral Resources in India. Andhra Pradesh with varied geological formations, contain rich & variety of industrial minerals and building stones. 

Andhra Pradesh is listed top in the deposit and production of mica in India. Minerals found in the state include limestone, reserves of Oil and Natural Gas, Manganese, Asbestos, Iron Ore, Ball Clay, Fire Clay, Gold Diamonds, Graphite, Dolomite, Quartz, Tungsten, Steatitic, Feldspar, Silica Sand etc. It has about one third of India's limestone reserves and is known for large exclusive deposits of Barytes and Galaxy granite in the international market. 

Mining is identified as one of the growth engines for the overall development of industry and infrastructure. The Tummalapalle Uranium mine in Andhra has confirmed 49,000 tonnes of ore and there are indications that it could hold reserves totaling three times its current size. 700 million tonnes of metal grade Bauxite deposits in close proximity to Visakhapatnam Port.

Reliance Industries Limited struck nine trillion cubic feet of gas reserves in the Krishna Godavari Basin Basin, 150 km off the Andhra Pradesh coast near Kakinada. Discovery of large quantity of natural gas in KG Basin is expected to provide rapid economic growth. 

==Transportation==

=== Roadways ===
Asian Highway 45 passing through Ongole

Roads in Andhra Pradesh comprises National Highways and state highways with district roads as well. NH 5, with a highway network of around 1000 km in the state, is a part of Golden Quadrilateral Project undertaken by National Highways Development Project. It also forms part of AH 45 which comes under the Asian Highway Network.

The Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation (APSRTC) is the major public bus transport owned by the state government which runs thousands of buses connecting different parts of the state. Pandit Nehru Bus Station (PNBS) in Vijayawada is one of the largest bus terminals in Asia. 

=== Railways ===
The New look of Vijayawada railway station

Andhra Pradesh has a railway network of 5046 km and have played a significant role in boosting the economy of the state alongside developing the industrial and the tourism sectors. One of the highest broad gauge tracks in the world is in eastern ghats route that runs from Visakhapatnam to Anantagiri. Most of Andhra Pradesh falls under South Central Railway zone with Vijayawada, Guntur and Guntakal divisions. The East Coast Railway zone serves the north coastal districts.

Rajahmundry Airport Terminal

Waltair Railway Division under ECoR zone, is fourth largest revenue earning division in India. Vijayawada railway station is the highest grosser in the SCR zone and one of busiest railway junctions in India.

=== Airports ===

Visakhapatnam Airport is the only International airport in the state serving more than 1 million passengers annually. There are also three more Domestic airports at Vijayawada, Rajahmundry, and Tirupati. Vijayawada Airport is the hub of Indian regional airline Air Costa.

Ship Darshani Prem at Visakhapatnam seaport

=== Seaports ===

Andhra Pradesh has one of the country's largest port at Visakhapatnam in terms of (cargo handling). The other famous ports are Krishnapatnam Port(Nellore), Gangavaram Port and Kakinada Port. Gangavaram Port is a deep seaport which can accommodate ocean liners up to 200,000–250,000 DWT. 

Six ports are under various stages of development in the PPP mode and there are 14 notified non-major ports at Bheemunipatnam, S.Yanam, Machilipatnam, Nizampatnam, Vadarevu etc. The State Government has prepared a master plan that envisages increasing the capacity of its non-major ports to handle 175 Mt in 2020. 

==Tourism==

RK Beach
Araku Valley
Pelican at Pulicat Lake Bird Sanctuary

Andhra Pradesh is promoted by its tourism department, APTDC as the Koh-i-Noor of India. The main tourist attractions include beaches, scenic hills, valleys, caves, forts, lakes, lush green fields etc. 

Beaches

There are many beaches in Visakhapatnam along the coast of Bay of Bengal namely R.K.Beach, Rishikonda Beach, Lawson's Bay Beach etc. Apart from these, other beaches along the long coastline of the state are at Manginapudi Beach (Krishna District), Suryalanka Beach (Guntur District), Maypadu and Krishnapatnam beaches (Nellore district), Vodarevu beach (Prakasam district), Uppada Beach (East Godavari district) etc. 

Caves

Borra Caves in the Ananthagiri Hills of the Eastern Ghats, near Vishakapatnam are famous for million-year-old stalactite and stalagmite formations. Belum Caves in Kurnool district are the second largest natural caves of 3.229 km in length on the Indian subcontinent. 

Valleys and Hills

Araku Valley is the famous hill station in Visakhapatnam district with thick forests, coffee plantations and waterfalls. Horsley Hills is a summer hill resort in the Chittoor district, situated at an elevation of 1.265 km, has natural flora and fauna. Papi Hills in East Godavari district is famous for its scenic beauty of the location in the river Godavari with. 

Ecotourism

The state with its rich forests and diverse flora & fauna provides ample scope for promoting ecotourism. The state has many Sanctuaries, National Parks, Zoological Parks. Some of them are Coringa, Krishna Wildlife Sanctuary, Nagarjunsagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve, Kambalakonda Wildlife Sanctuary, Sri Venkateswara Zoological Park (Tirupati), Indira Gandhi Zoological Park, (Visakhapatnam) etc. Atapaka Bird Sanctuary at Kolleru Lake and Pulicat Lake encompasing Pulicat Lake Bird Sanctuary attracts many migratory birds. 

Religious destinations

Apart from these, the state is home to many pilgrim destinations. It has many temples and shrines, mosques, and churches. Some famous temples, mosques, Buddhist shrines and churches of religious importance which are often visited by many tourists include Tirumal temple, Srisailam temple, Kanaka Durga Temple, Srikalahasti temple, Shahi jamia masjid in Adoni, Gunadala Church in Vijayawada, Buddhist centres at Amaravati, Nagarjuna Konda etc., and many more as well.

==Telugu cinema==

In the early 1980s, the Telugu film industry had largely shifted from Chennai to Hyderabad. The Telugu film culture (or, "Tollywood") is the second-largest film industry in India next to Bollywood Film Industry. Prolific film producer from the state, D. Ramanaidu holds a Guinness Record for the most number of films produced by a person. Nandhamuri Taraka Rama Rao,Akkineni Nageswara Rao and Chiranjeevi are the most prominent figures of Telugu film industry.

In the years 2005, 2006 and 2008 the Telugu film industry, has produced the largest number of films in India exceeding the number of films produced in Bollywood. The industry holds the Guinness World Record for the largest film production facility in the world. 

==Education and research==

Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur district

According to the 2014 census, Andhra Pradesh has an overall literacy rate of 91.01%.
Apart from thousands of schools ranging from the pre-primary to the senior secondary ones, the state is home to a number of institutes, which impart higher education. The Department of Higher Education deals with matters relating to education at various levels in the State. 

The Government of Andhra Pradesh has established Rajiv Gandhi University of Knowledge Technologies (RGUKT) in 2008 to cater to the educational needs of the gifted rural youth of Andhra Pradesh. 

The higher education includes many colleges, universities and research institutes providing professional education in the fields of arts, humanities, science, engineering, law, medicine, business, and veterinary sciences, with undergraduate and post graduation. Some of the state funded universities include:

Universities
*Acharya Nagarjuna University at Guntur 
*Andhra University at Vishakapatnam 
*Damodaram Sanjivayya National Law University at Vishakapatnam 
*Dr. N.T.R. University of Health Sciences at Vijayawada 
* JNTU Kakinada & JNTU Anantapur 
*Sri Krishnadevaraya University at Anantapur 
*Sri Venkateswara University at Tirupati 

and many with deemed Universities namely K L University, GITAM & Vignan University provides higher education.

 Research 
Research institutes have been set up by the central government in the state. Some of them include:
*School of Planning and Architecture, Vijayawada, an autonomous research institute under Ministry of Human Resource Development of Govt. of India.
*National Atmospheric Research Laboratory (NARL), carry out fundamental and applied research in Atmospheric and Space Sciences. 

Space research organization

Indian Space Research Organisation (or Sriharikota Range (SHAR)) at barrier island of Sriharikota in Nellore district of Andhra Pradesh is a satellite launching station. It is India's primary orbital launch site. India's lunar orbiter Chandrayaan-1 was launched from the centre at 6:22 AM IST on 22 October 2008. 

==Sports==

ACA-VDCA Cricket stadium at Madhurawada
The Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh, is the governing body which looks after the infrastructure development in Cricket, Field hockey, Association Football, Olympic weightlifting, Chess, Water Sports, Tennis, Badminton, Table Tennis, Cycling etc. Sports like kho kho, kabaddi are played mostly in Andhra Pradesh.

One of the most popular sports in Andhra Pradesh is cricket. The ACA-VDCA Stadium in Visakhapatnam is the home to the Andhra Pradesh cricket team. These venues regularly hosts international as well as domestic matches. Notable cricketers from Andhra Pradesh, include Maharajkumar of Vizianagram, M. V. Narasimha Rao, M. S. K. Prasad, V.V.S. Laxman, Tirumalasetti Suman, Arshad Ayub, Ambati Rayudu, Venkatapathy Raju, Sravanthi Naidu, Yalaka Venugopal Rao etc.

Other accomplished sports-persons include, A. Ramana Rao, Karnam Malleswari(Weight Lifting), Pullela Gopichand(Badminton), Chetan Anand (badminton), Guttikonda Pradeep (Volley Ball), Kamineni Eswara Rao (Arjuna Award winner) etc. Grandmasters in Chess like, Humpy Koneru, Pendyala Harikrishna, Dronavalli Harika hail from the state.

==Newspapers and journals==
The electronic media with wide range of news channels and print media that cover many national newspapers enlightens the people of Andhra Pradesh with all important political, economic and social news of national as well as international importance. Some of the notable Telugu newspapers are Eenadu, Andhra Jyothy, Sakshi, Andhra Bhoomi, Vaartha etc. and English daily includes Deccan Chronicle, The Times of India, The Hindu etc. Along with these there are also Urdu newspapers name The Munsif Daily, Awam, Etemaad etc. For the purpose of business related news the print media has certain publishers namely The Economic Times, Business Line. 

==Controversy==
The earlier state of Andhra Pradesh was divided by Indian parliament using Article 3. There was a controversy on using Article 3 in dividing the state. Parliament of India divided the state against the opinion of Andhra Pradesh assembly just before 2014 general elections. Also the way the discussions happened when the bill was passed in Loksabha, by closing the doors and shutting down TV cameras, created a controversy. Also its said that such an important decision of dividing a state is done in the Loksabha in less than one hour. Also the revenue sharing between the states is done such that Andhra Pradesh gets a deficit budget of around 14 K crores and Telangana state gets a surplus budget of around 7 K crores.

==See also==

* Index of Andhra Pradesh-related articles
* 
* List of people from Andhra Pradesh
* Middle kingdoms of India
* Part One of the Constitution of India
* States and union territories of India

==References==

==External links==

* 
* STD Codes of Andhra Pradesh
* Andhra Pradesh Facts & Figures

; Government
* Andhra Pradesh Government Website
* Department of Tourism, Government of Andhra Pradesh


