[[Beyond the Pleasure Principle]]

Beyond the Pleasure Principle (first published in German in 1920 as ) is an essay by Sigmund Freud marking a major turning point in his theoretical approach. Previously, Freud attributed most human behavior to the sexual instinct (Eros or libido). With this essay, Freud went "beyond" the simple pleasure principle, developing his theory of drives with the addition of the death drive(s) (Todestrieb) In this work, Freud used the plural "death drives" (Todestriebe) much more frequently than in the singular. (often referred to as "Thanatos").

== Importance ==

The essay describes humans as struggling between two opposing drives: Eros, which produces creativity, harmony, sexual connection, reproduction, and self-preservation; and Thanatos, which brings destruction, repetition, aggression, compulsion, and self-destruction.

In sections IV and V, Freud posits that the process of creating living cells binds energy and creates an imbalance. It is the pressure of matter to return to its original state which gives cells their quality of living. The process is analogous to the creation and exhaustion of a battery. This pressure for molecular diffusion can be called a "death-wish". The compulsion of the matter in cells to return to a diffuse, inanimate state extends to the whole living organism. Thus, the psychological death-wish is a manifestation of an underlying physical compulsion present in every cell.

Freud also stated the basic differences, as he saw them, between his approach and Carl Jung's, and summarized published research into basic drives (Section VI).

== Synopsis ==

"Beyond the Pleasure Principle is a difficult text." Peter Gay, Freud: A Life for Our Time (London 1988) p. 398 As Ernest Jones, one of Freud's closest associates and a member of his Inner Ring, put it, "the train of thought by no means easy to follow...and Freud's views on the subject have often been considerably misinterpreted." Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud (London 1964) p. 510-11 

What have been called the "two distinct frescoes or canti" Laplanche, Life p. 107 of Beyond the Pleasure Principle break between sections III and IV. If, as Otto Fenichel remarked, Freud's "new classification has two bases, one speculative, and one clinical", Otto Fenichel, The Psychoanalytic Theory of Neurosis (London 1946) p. 58 thus far the clinical. In Freud's own words, the second section "is speculation, often far-fetched speculation, which the reader will consider or dismiss according to his individual predilection" Sigmund Freud, "Beyond the Pleasure Principle" in On Metapsychology (Middlesex 1987) p. 295 - it has been noted that "in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Freud used that unpromising word "speculations" more than once". Gay, Freud p. 704n 

===Clinical evidence (sections I-III)===
Freud begins with "a commonplace then unchallenged in psychoanalytic theory: 'The course of mental events is automatically regulated by the pleasure principle...a strong tendency toward the pleasure principle'". Gay, Freud p. 399 After considering the inevitable presence of unpleasant experiences in the life of the mind, he concludes the book's first section to the effect that the presence of such unpleasant experiences "does not contradict the dominance of the pleasure principle...does not seem to necessitate any far-reaching limitation of the pleasure principle." Freud, "Beyond" p. 280 

====Exceptions to the pleasure principle====
Freud proceeds to look for "evidence, for the existence of hitherto unsuspected forces 'beyond' the pleasure principle." He found exceptions to the universal power of the pleasure principle—"situations...with which the pleasure principle cannot cope adequately" Jean-Michel Quinodoz, Reading Freud (London 2005) p. 187 —in four main areas: children's games, as exemplified in his grandson's famous "fort-da" game; "the recurrent dreams of war neurotics...; the pattern of self-injuring behaviour that can be traced through the lives of certain people neurosis"; the tendency of many patients in psycho-analysis to act out over and over again unpleasant experiences of their childhood." Jones, Life p. 506 

====Repetition compulsion====
From these cases, Freud inferred the existence of motivations beyond the pleasure principle. Freud already felt in 1919 that he could safely postulate "the principle of a repetition compulsion in the unconscious mind, based upon instinctual activity and probably inherent in the very nature of the instincts—a principle powerful enough to overrule the pleasure-principle". Sigmund Freud, "The Uncanny" (1919), in Studies in Parapsychology (Alix Strachey trans.) p. 44 In the first half of Beyond the Pleasure Principle, "a first phase, the most varied manifestations of repetition, considered as their irreducible quality, are attributed to the essence of drives" Jean Laplanche, Life and Death in Psychoanalysis (London 1976) p. 107 in precisely the same way.

Building on his 1914 article "Recollecting,Repeating and Working Through", Freud highlights how the "patient cannot remember the whole of what is repressed in him, and...is obliged to repeat the repressed material as a contemporary experience instead of...remembering it as something belonging to the past:" Freud, "Beyond" p. 288 a "compulsion to repeat."

====Independence from the pleasure principle====
Freud still wanted to examine the relationship between repetition compulsion and the pleasure principle. Freud "Beyond" p. 290 Although compulsive behaviors evidently satisfied some sort of drive, they were a source of direct unpleasure. Freud, "Beyond" p. 290 Somehow, "no lesson has been learnt from the old experience of these activities having led only to unpleasure. In spite of that, they are repeated, under pressure of a compulsion". Freud, "Beyond" p. 292 Also noting repetitions in the lives of normal people—who appeared to be "pursued by a malignant fate or possessed by some daemonic power," likely alluding to the Latin motto errare humanum est, perseverare autem diabolicum ("to err is human, to persist committing errors longer available is of the devil")—Freud concludes that the human psyche includes a compulsion to repeat that is independent of the pleasure principle. Freud, Sigmund. Beyond the Pleasure Principle (The Standard Edition). Trans. James Strachey. New York: Liveright Publishing Corporation, 1961. 

===Speculation (sections IV-VII)===
Arguing that dreams in which one relives trauma serve a binding function in the mind, connected to repetition compulsion, Freud admits that such dreams are an exception to the rule that the dream is the fulfillment of a wish. Freud, "Beyond" p. 304 Asserting that the first task of the mind is to bind excitations to prevent trauma (so that the pleasure principle does not begin to dominate mental activities until the excitations are bound), he reiterates the clinical fact that for "a person in analysis...the compulsion to repeat the events of his childhood in the transference evidently disregards the pleasure principle in every way". Freud, "Beyond" p. 308 

====Biological basis for repetition compulsion====
Freud begins to look for analogies repetition compulsion in the "essentially conservative...feature of instinctual life...the lower we go in the animal scale the more stereotyped does instinctual behavior appear". Jones Life p. 507 Thereafter "a leap in the text can be noticed when Freud places the compulsion to repeat on an equal footing with 'an urge...to restore an earlier state of things'" Gunnar Karlson, Psychoanalysis in a New Light (Cambridge 2010) p. 147 - ultimately that of the original inorganic condition. Declaring that "the aim of life is death" and "inanimate things existed before living ones", Freud, "Beyond" p. 311 Freud interprets an organism’s drive to avoid danger only as a way of avoiding a short-circuit to death: the organisms seeks to die in its own way. He thus found his way to his celebrated concept of the death instinct.

Thereupon, "Freud plunged into the thickets of speculative modern biology, even into philosophy, in search of corroborative evidence" Gay, Freud p. 401 - looking to "arguments of every kind, frequently borrowed from fields outside of psychoanalytic practice, calling to the rescue biology, philosophy, and mythology". Laplanche, Life p. 110 He turned to prewar experiments on protozoa - of perhaps questionable relevance, even if it is not the case that 'his interpretation of the experiments on the successive generations of protozoa contains a fatal flaw'. Malcolm Macmillan, Freud evaluated (MIT 1997) p. 400 The most that can perhaps be said is that Freud did not find "any biological argument which contradicts his dualistic conception of instinctual life", Jean-Michel Quinodoz, Reading Freud (London 2005) p. 190 but at the same time, "as Jones (1957) points out, 'no biological observation can be found to support the idea of a death instinct, one which contradicts all biological principles'" Charles Rycroft, A Critical Dictionary of Psychoanalysis (London 1995) p. 31 either.

====Masochism as clinical manifestation====
Freud then continued with a reference to "the harbour of Schopenhauer's philosophy"; but in groping for a return to the clinical he admitted that "it looks suspiciously as though we were trying to find a way out of a highly embarrassing situation at any price". Freud, "Beyond" p. 322 and p. 328 Freud eventually decided that he could find a clinical manifestation of the death instinct in the phenomenon of masochism, "hitherto regarded as secondary to sadism...and suggested that there could be a primary masochism, a self-injuring tendency which would be an indication of the death instinct". Jones, Life p. 509 In a footnote he cited Sabina Spielrein admitting that "A considerable part of this speculation has been anticipated in a work which is full of valuable matter and ideas but is unfortunately not entirely clear to me: (Sabina Spielrein: Die Destruktion als Ursache des Werdens, Jahrbuch für Psychoanalyse, IV, 1912). She designates the sadistic component as 'destructive'." Freud, "Beyond" p. ? To then explain the sexual instinct as well in terms of a compulsion to repeat, Freud inserts a myth from Plato that humans are driven to reproduce in order to join together the sexes, which had once existed in single individuals who were both male and female - still "in utter disregard of disciplinary distinctions"; Teresa de Lauretis, Freud's Drive (Basingstoke 2008) p. 77 and admits again the speculative nature of his own ideas, "lacking a direct translation of observation into theory....One may have made a lucky hit or one may have gone shamefully astray"'. Freud, "Beyond" p. 333 

====Conclusion====
Nevertheless with the libido or Eros as the life force finally set out on the other side of the repetition compulsion equation, the way was clear for the book's closing "vision of two elemental pugnacious forces in the mind, Eros and Thanatos, locked in eternal battle". Gay. Freud p. 401 

== Composition: Freud's defensiveness ==

Freud's daughter Sophie died at the start of 1920, partway between Freud's first (1919) version and the version of Beyond the Pleasure Principle reworked and published in 1920. Freud insisted that the death had no relation to the contents of the book. In a July 18, 1920, letter to Max Eitingon, Freud wrote, "The Beyond is now finally finished. You will be able to confirm that it was half ready when Sophie lived and flourished". Gay, Freud p. 703 He had however already written (in June) to Ferenczi "that 'curious continuations' had turned up in it, presumably the part about the potential immortality of protozoa". Ernest Jones considers Freud's claim on Eitingon "a rather curious request... an inner denial of his novel thoughts about death having been influenced by his depression over losing his daughter". Jones, Life p. 504 Others have also wondered about "inventing a so-called death instinct - is this not one way of theorising, that is, disposing of - by means of a theory - a feeling of the "demoniac" in life itself...exacerbated by the unexpected death of Freud's daughter"? Maria Torok, in Nicolas Abraham/Maria Torok, The Wolf Man's Magic Word (Minneapolis 19860 p. 90 - and it is certainly striking that "the term 'death drive' - Todestrieb - entered his correspondence a week after Sophie Halberstadt's death"; so that we may well accept at the very least that the "loss can claim a subsidiary role...his analytic preoccupation with destructiveness". Gay, Freud p. 395 

== Fruitfulness ==

On his final page, Freud acknowledges that his theorising "in turn raises a host of other questions to which we can at present find no answer". name="Freud, Beyond p. 336" Whatever legitimate reservations there may be about "the improbability of our speculations. A queer instinct, indeed, directed to the destruction of its own organic home", Sigmund Freud, New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (London 1991) p. 139 Freud's speculative essay has proven remarkably fruitful in stimulating further psychoanalytic research and theorising, both in himself and in his followers; and we may consider it as a prime example of Freud in his role "as a problem finder - one who raises new questions...called attention to a whole range of human phenomena and processes". Howard Gardner, Extraordinary Minds (London 1997) p. 82 Thus for example Andre Green has suggested that Freud "turned to the biology of micro-organisms...because he was unable to find the answers to the questions raised by psychoanalytic practice": the fruitfulness of the questions - in the spirit of 'Maurice Blanchot's sentence, answer is the misfortune of the question' Andre Green, in P. B. Talamo et al, W. R. Bion (London 2007) p. 119 and p. 122 - remains nonetheless unimpaired.

===Freud's later writing===
The distinction between pleasure principle and death drive led Freud to restructure his model of the psyche. Angela Richards, "Editor's Note" Metapsychology p. 272 

With Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Freud also introduced the question of violence and destructiveness in humans. Richards, Metapsychology p. 272 These themes play an important role in Civilization and Its Discontents, in which Freud suggests that civilization's major function is to repress the death instinct. The instinct persists in the forms of superego and neurosis.

Freud's indication "that in cases of traumatism there is a ' lack of any preparedness for anxiety '...is a forerunner of the distinction he would later make...between 'automatic anxiety' and 'anxiety as a signal'". Quinodox, Reading Freud p. 189 

===Other theorists===
* For Lacan, repetition compulsion was one of the "four...terms introduced by Freud as fundamental concepts, namely, the unconscious, repetition, the transference and the drive". Jacques Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-Analysis (London 1994) p. 12 
* Eric Berne adapts the way "Freud speaks of the repetition compulsion and the destiny compulsion...to apply them to the entire life courses" Eric Berne, What Do You Say After You Say Hello? (Corgi 1975) p. 58 of normals and neurotics alike.
* Both Melanie Klein and Lacan were to adopt versions of the death drive in their own theoretical constructs. "Klein's concept of the death drive differs from Freud's...but there is an ever-increasing reference to the death drive as a given cause of mental development" L. Stonebridge/J. Phillips, Reading Melanie Klein (London 1998) p. 30 in her works. Lacan for his part considered that "the death drive is only the mask of the symbolic order, in so...far as it has not been realised", adding modestly of Beyond the Pleasure Principle "...either it makes not the least bit of sense or it has exactly the sense I say it has". Lacan, Seminar II p. 326 and p. 60 

== Critical reception ==

Beyond the Pleasure Principle may be Freud's most controversial text. Jacques Lacan, a self-styled Freudian, called it "this extraordinary text of Freud's, unbelievably ambiguous, almost confused". Jacques-Alain Miller, The Seminar of Jacques Lacan: Book II (Cambridge 19880 p. 37 One of Freud's most sympathetic biographers wrote that "Beyond the Pleasure Principle is a difficult text....the reassuring intimacy with clinical experience that marks most of Freud's papers, even at their most theoretical, seems faint here, almost absent." Peter Gay, Freud: A Life for our Time (London 1988) p. 398 He went on to quote Freud's personal physician: "Max Schur, whom no one can accuse of reading Freud unsympathetically, said flatly: 'We can only assume that Freud's conclusions...are an example of ad hoc reasoning to prove a preformed hypothesis...throughout Beyond the Pleasure Principle '". Gay, p. 398n 

Ernest Jones concluded that "This book is further noteworthy in being the only one of Freud's which has received little acceptance on the part of his followers". Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud (London 1964) p. 505 Many of Freud's colleagues and students rejected the theories proposed in Beyond the Pleasure Principle because the idea of an instinct towards death seemed strange. Freud, Sigmund. Civilization and its Discontents (The Standard Edition). Trans. James Strachey. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 1961. Boeree, Dr. C. George. "Sigmund Freud." Webspace. 2009. Web. 22 July 2010. 

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* "The Language of Psycho-Analysis", Jean Laplanche et J.B. Pontalis, Editeur: W. W. Norton & Company, 1974, ISBN 0-393-01105-4
*Jacques Derrida, The Post Card: From Socrates to Freud and Beyond.
*Bernard Stiegler, Desire and Knowledge: The Dead Seize the Living.

== External links ==
*Beyond the Pleasure Principle (C. J. M. Hubback, trans., 1922.)
* 
* 
**"Thanatos": p. 447; 
**"Nirvana Principle": pp. 272-3:
**"Compulsion to Repeat" ("Repetition compulsion"): pp. 78-80.


