[[Deucalion]]

Deucalion from "Promptuarii Iconum Insigniorum "

In Greek mythology, Deucalion (; ) was the son of Prometheus; ancient sources name his mother as Clymene, Hesione, or Pronoia. The scholia to Odyssey 10.2 names Clymene as the commonly identified mother, along with Hesione (citing Acusilaus, FGrH 2 F 34) and possibly Pronoia. The anger of Zeus was ignited by the hubris of the Pelasgians, so he decided to put an end to the Bronze Age. Lycaon, the king of Arcadia, had sacrificed a boy to Zeus, who was appalled by this savage offering. Zeus unleashed a deluge, so that the rivers ran in torrents and the sea flooded the coastal plain, engulfed the foothills with spray, and washed everything clean. Deucalion, with the aid of his father Prometheus, was saved from this deluge by building a chest. Like the Biblical Noah and the Mesopotamian counterpart Utnapishtim, he uses his device to survive the deluge with his wife, Pyrrha.

==Etymology==
Deucalion's name comes from δεῦκος, deucos, a variant of γλεῦκος, gleucos, i.e. "sweet new wine, must, sweetness" and ἁλιεύς, haliéus, i.e. "sailor, seaman, fisher". His wife Pyrrha's name is derived from the adjective πυρρός, -ά, -όν, pyrrhós, -á, -ón, i.e. "flaming (figuratively, never with actual fire)" or "flame-colored, orange". 

Deucalion is parallel to the Biblical Noah and to Utnapishtim, the survivor of the Sumerian flood that is told in the Epic of Gilgamesh. 

==In ancient Greek mythography==
Deucalion and Pyrrha from a 1562 version of Ovid's Metamorphoses.
Of Deucalion's birth, the Argonautica (from the 3rd century BC) states:

:"There Achaea, i.e. Greece is a land encircled by lofty mountains, rich in sheep and in pasture, where Prometheus, son of Iapetus, begat goodly Deucalion, who first founded cities and reared temples to the immortal gods, and first ruled over men. This land the neighbours who dwell around call Haemonia Thessaly."

The fullest accounts are provided in Ovid's Metamorphoses (8 AD) and in the Library of Pseudo-Apollodorus. Apollodorus' library at theoi.com Deucalion, who reigned over the region of Phthia, had been forewarned of the flood by his father, Prometheus. Deucalion was to build a chest and provision it carefully (no animals are rescued in this version of the Flood myth), so that when the waters receded after nine days
 Pseudo-Apollodorus Myth., Bibliotheca (sub nomine Apollodori)
Chapter 1, section 48, line 1
 Δευκαλίων δὲ ἐν τῇ λάρνακι διὰ
τῆς θαλάσσης φερόμενος ἡμέρας ἐννέα καὶ νύκτας
 ἴσας τῷ Παρνασῷ προσίσχει, κἀκεῖ τῶν ὄμβρων
παῦλαν λαβόντων ἐκβὰς θύει Διὶ φυξίῳ. 
, he and his wife Pyrrha, daughter of Epimetheus, were the one surviving pair of humans. Their chest touched solid ground on Mount Parnassus, Pindar, Olympian Odes, 9.43; cf. Ovid, Metamorphoses, I.313–347 or Mount Etna in Sicily, or Mount Athos in Chalkidiki, Servius' commentary on Virgil's Bucolics, 6:41 or Mount Othrys in Thessaly. Hellanicus, FGrH 4 F 117, quoted by the scholia to Pindar, Olympia 9.62b: "Hellanicus says that the chest didn't touch down on Parnassus, but by Othrys in Thessaly. 

Deucalion and Pyrrha, Giovanni Maria Bottala
Hyginus mentions the opinion of a Hegesianax that Deucalion is to be identified with Aquarius, "because during his reign such quantities of water poured from the sky that the great Flood resulted."

Once the deluge was over and the couple had given thanks to Zeus, Deucalion (said in several of the sources to have been aged 82 at the time) consulted an oracle of Themis about how to repopulate the earth. He was told to cover your head and throw the bones of your mother behind your shoulder. Deucalion and Pyrrha understood that "mother" is Gaia, the mother of all living things, and the "bones" to be rocks. They threw the rocks behind their shoulders and the stones formed people. Pyrrha's became women; Deucalion's became men
 Pseudo-Apollodorus Myth., Bibliotheca (sub nomine Apollodori)
Chapter 1, section 48, line 7
καὶ Διὸς εἰπόντος ὑπὲρ κεφαλῆς ἔβαλλεν αἴρων λίθους,
καὶ οὓς μὲν ἔβαλε Δευκαλίων, ἄνδρες ἐγένοντο, οὓς
δὲ Πύρρα, γυναῖκες. ὅθεν καὶ λαοὶ μεταφορικῶς ὠνο-
μάσθησαν ἀπὸ τοῦ λᾶας ὁ λίθος. 
 Pindarus Lyr., Olympia
Ode 9, line 43

μὴ νῦν λαλάγει τὰ τοι-
 αῦτ'· ἔα πόλεμον μάχαν τε πᾶσαν
χωρὶς ἀθανάτων· φέροις δὲ Πρωτογενείας
ἄστει γλῶσσαν, ἵν' αἰολοβˈρέντα Διὸς αἴσᾳ
Πύρρα Δευκαλίων τε Παρνασσοῦ καταβάντε
δόμον ἔθεντο πρῶτον, ἄτερ δ' εὐνᾶς ὁμόδαμον
κτισσάσθαν λίθινον γόνον·
λαοὶ δ' ὀνύμασθεν. 
.

Deucalion and Pyrrha had at least two children, Hellen and Protogenea, and possibly a third, Amphictyon (who is autochthonous in other traditions).

Their children as apparently named in one of the oldest texts, Catalogue of Women, include daughters Pandora and Thyia, and at least one son, Hellen. Hes. Catalogue fragments 2, 5 and 7; cf. M.L. West (1985) The Hesiodic Catalogue of Women. Oxford, pp. 50–2, who posits that a third daughter, Protogeneia, who was named at (e.g.) Pausanias, 5.1.3, was also present in the Catalogue. Their descendants were said to have dwelt in Thessaly. One corrupt fragment might make Deucalion the son of Prometheus and Pronoea. A scholium to Odyssey 10.2 (=Catalogue fr. 4) reports that Hesiod called Deucalion's mother "Pryneie" or "Prynoe", corrupt forms which Dindorf believed to conceal Pronoea's name. The emendation is considered to have "undeniable merit" by A. Casanova (1979) La famiglia di Pandora: analisi filologica dei miti di Pandora e Prometeo nella tradizione esiodea. Florence, p. 145. 

On the other hand, Dionysius of Halicarnassus gives Deucalion's parentage as Prometheus and Clymene, daughter of Oceanus, and mentions nothing about a flood, but instead names him as commander of those from Parnassus who drove the "sixth generation" of Pelasgians from Thessaly.

One of the earliest Greek historians, Hecataeus of Miletus, was said to have written a book about Deucalion, but it no longer survives. The only extant fragment of his to mention Deucalion does not mention the flood either, but names him as the father of Orestheus, king of Aetolia. The much later geographer Pausanias, following on this tradition, names Deucalion as a king of Ozolian Locris and father of Orestheus. Plutarch mentions a legend that Deucalion and Pyrrha had settled in Dodona, Epirus; while Strabo asserts that they lived at Cynus, and that her grave is still to be found there, while his may be seen at Athens; he also mentions a pair of Aegean islands named after the couple.

The 2nd-century writer Lucian gave an account of the Greek Deucalion in De Dea Syria that seems to refer more to the Near Eastern flood legends: in his version, Deucalion (whom he also calls Sisythus) The manuscripts transmit scythea, "Scythian", rather than Sisythus, which is conjectural. took his children, their wives, and pairs of animals with him on the ark, and later built a great temple in Manbij (northern Syria), on the site of the chasm that received all the waters; he further describes how pilgrims brought vessels of sea water to this place twice a year, from as far as Arabia and Mesopotamia, to commemorate this event.

===Mosaic accretions===
John Lemprière, in Bibliotheca Classica, notes that as the story was re-told in later versions, it accumulated details from the stories of Noah and Moses: "Thus Apollodorus gives Deucalion a great chest as a means of safety; Plutarch speaks of the pigeons by which he sought to find out whether the waters had retired; and Lucian of the animals of every kind which he had taken with him &c." Lemprière, John. Bibliotheca Classica, page 475. 

===Dating by early scholars===

For some time during the Middle Ages, many European Christian scholars continued to accept Greek mythical history at face value, thus asserting that Deucalion's flood was a regional flood, that occurred a few centuries later than the global one survived by Noah's family. On the basis of the archaeological stele known as the Parian Chronicle, Deucalion's Flood was usually fixed as occurring sometime around c. 1528 BC. Deucalion's flood may be dated in the chronology of Saint Jerome to c. 1460 BC. According to Augustine of Hippo (City of God XVIII,8,10,&11), Deucalion and his father Prometheus were contemporaries of Moses. According to Clement of Alexandria in his Stromata, "...in the time of Crotopus occurred the burning of Phaethon, and the deluges of Deucalion."

==Deucalionids==
The descendants of Deucalion and Pyrrha are below:

*Hellen, Amphictyon, Orestheus, Protogeneia, Pandora II and Thyia are their children.
*Aeolus, Aethlius, Dorus, Graecus, Makednos, Magnes, Xuthus are their grandsons.

==Popular culture==
Deucalion is the name chosen by Frankenstein's monster in the 2005 book Dean Koontz's Frankenstein by Dean Koontz and Kevin J. Anderson. Koontz, Dean and Kevin J. Anderson. Dean Koontz's Frankenstein: Book One Prodigal Son. New York: Bantam, 2005. 

In The Chronicles of the Imaginarium Geographica series by James A. Owen, Deucalion is an ancient shipbuilder who taught animals to walk and talk. He has many sons, including Sobek, Hor, and Amun, and built dragonships. He is also called Thoth and Ordo Maas, and is the ancestor of Odysseus, Merlin, and King Arthur. Owen, James A. "Here, There Be Dragons". New York: Simon & Schuster, 2006. 

In the anime series Kiddy Grade, Deucalion is the name given to a massive ship that was intended to take the upper class of the galaxy away to a new space where they believed they could escape the growing revolutionary movements rippling through the galactic government.

Deucalion (Gideon Emery) is the name of the Season 3 antagonist in MTV's Teen Wolf, written by Jeff Davis. He is the leader of the Alpha werewolf pack, and is intent on pitting Scott McCall (Tyler Posey), and Derek Hale (Tyler Hoechlin) against each other. He brought his pack to Beacon Hills because of the word of a Kanima. It is later revealed that while blinded (by Gerard) he can see as a wolf.

Deucalion is the name of the protagonist of the novel , by C. J. Cutcliffe Hyne. He is the only survivor of the fall of the continent Atlantis.

==Primary sources==
*Hesiod, Catalogue of Women fragments 2–7 and 234 (7th or 6th century BC)
*Hecataeus of Miletus, frag. 341 (500 BC)
*Pindar, Olympian Odes 9 (466 BC)
*Plato, "Timaeus" 22B, "Critias" 112A (4th century BC)
*Apollonius of Rhodes, Argonautica 3.1086 (3rd century BC)
*Virgil, Georgics 1.62 (29 BC)
*Gaius Julius Hyginus, Fabulae 153; Poeticon astronomicon 2.29 (c. 20 BC)
*Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities 1.17.3 (c. 15 BC)
*Ovid, Metamorphoses, 1.318ff.; 7.356 (c. 8 AD)
*Strabo, Geographica, 9.4 (c. 23 AD)
*Bibliotheca 1.7.2 (c. 1st century AD?)
*Plutarch, Life of Pyrrhus, 1 (75 AD)
*Lucian, De Dea Syria 12, 13, 28, 33 (2nd century AD)
*Pausanias, Description of Greece 10.38.1 (2nd century AD)
*Nonnus, Dionysiaca 3.211; 6.367 (c. 500 AD)

==See also==
*Deluge (mythology)

==References==
===General reference===
*Liddell and Scott's Greek-English Lexicon at the Perseus Project

===Particular references===

==External links==

*Deucalion from Charles Smith, Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology (1867), with source citations and some variants not given here.
*Deucalion from Carlos Parada, Genealogical Guide to Greek Mythology.
* Images of Deucalion and Pyrrha in the Warburg Institute Iconographic Database

 Deucalion

