[[Family resemblance]]

Family resemblance () is a philosophical idea made popular by Ludwig Wittgenstein, with the best known exposition being given in the posthumously published book Philosophical Investigations (1953) 
 It argues that things which may be thought to be connected by one essential common feature may in fact be connected by a series of overlapping similarities, where no one feature is common to all. Games, which Wittgenstein used as an example in order to explain the notion, have become the paradigmatic example of a group that is related by family resemblances. It has been suggested that Wittgenstein picked up the idea and the term from Nietzsche, who had been using it, as did many nineteenth century philologists, when discoursing about language families. Sluga H., Family Resemlance, Grazer Philosophische Studien 71 (2006) 1; see also A Wittgenstein Dictionary, ed. H.-J. Glock, London:Blackwell 1996 John Stuart Mill described family resemblances in Chapter 8 of Book 1 in "A System of Logic" published in 1843. http://oll.libertyfund.org/?option=com_staticxt&staticfile=show.php%3Ftitle=246&chapter=39811&layout=html&Itemid=27

("But where the resemblances and differences on which our classifications are founded are not of this palpable and easily determinable kind; especially where they consist not in any one quality but in a number of qualities, the effects of which, being blended together, are not very easily discriminated, and referred each to its true source; it often happens that names are applied to nameable objects, with no distinct connotation present to the minds of those who apply them. They are only influenced by a general resemblance between the new object and all or some of the old familiar objects which they have been accustomed to call by that name. This, as we have seen, is the law which even the mind of the philosopher must follow, in giving names to the simple elementary feelings of our nature: but, where the things to be named are complex wholes, a philosopher is not content with noticing a general resemblance; he examines what the resemblance consists in: and he only gives the same name to things which resemble one another in the same definite particulars. The philosopher, therefore, habitually employs his general names with a definite connotation. But language was not made, and can only in some small degree be mended, by philosophers. In the minds of the real arbiters of language, general names, especially where the classes they denote cannot be brought before the tribunal of the outward senses to be identified and discriminated, connote little more than a vague gross resemblance to the things which they were earliest, or have been most, accustomed to call by those names. When, for instance, ordinary persons predicate the words just or unjust of any action, fnoble or meanf of any sentiment, expression, or demeanour, statesman orcharlatan of any personage figuring in politics, do they mean to affirm of those various subjects any determinate attributes, of whatever kind? No: they merely recognise, as they think, some likeness, more or less vague and loose, between gtheseg and some other things which they have been accustomed to denominate or to hear denominated by those appellations.") 

The first occurrence of the term "Family resemblance" is found in a note from 1930, commenting on Spengler's ideas. Wittgenstein L.,(1998) Culture and Value, London:Blackwell, p 14. Spengler's influence in this and other forms has been considered in papers published after this collection of notes became available, see e.g. DeAngelis W., "Wittgenstein and Spengler," Dialogue 33 (1994):41–61 The notion itself features widely in Wittgenstein's later work, and in the Investigations it is introduced in response to questions about the general form of propositions and the essence of language – questions which were central to Wittgenstein throughout his philosophical career. This suggests that family resemblance was of prime importance for Wittgenstein's later philosophy; however, like many of his ideas, it is hard to find precise agreement within the secondary literature on either its place within Wittgenstein's later thought or on its wider philosophical significance.

Since the publication of the Investigations the notion of family resemblance has been discussed extensively not only in the philosophical literature, but also, for example, in works dealing with classification where the approach is described as 'polythetic', distinguishing it from the traditional approach known now as 'monothetic'. Prototype theory is a recent development in cognitive science where this idea has also been explored. As the idea gains popularity, earlier instances of its occurrence are rediscovered e.g. in 18th century taxonomy, Winsor M., 2003, Non-essentialist methods in pre-Darwinian taxonomy, Biology and Philosophy 18 (2003) 387–400 in the writings of Vygotsky or Tatarkiewicz. Tatarkiewicz W., Postawa estetyczna, literacka i poetycka (1933) where it is called 'domino resemblance'. 

==Philosophical context==
The local context where the topic of family resemblances appears is
Wittgenstein's critique of language. In Philosophical Investigations §65-71 the plurality of language uses is compared to the plurality of games. Next it is asserted that games have common features but no one feature is found in all of them. The whole argument has become famous under the heading 'language games'.

The larger context in which Wittgenstein's philosophy is seen to develop considers his uncompromising opposition to essences, mental entities
and other forms of idealism which were accepted as a matter of fact in
continental philosophy at the turn of the preceding century. In his
view the main cause for such errors is language and its uncritical use.
In the received view concepts, categories or classes are taken to rely
on necessary features common to all items covered by them. Abstraction is the procedure which acknowledges this necessity and
derives essences but in the absence of a single common feature it
is bound to fail.

==Terminology==
The term "Family resemblance" as feature of Wittgenstein's philosophy owes much to its translation in English. Wittgenstein, who wrote mostly in German, used the compound word 'Familienähnlichkeit' but as he lectured and conversed in English he used 'family likeness' (e.g. The Blue Book, p. 17,33; The Brown Book,§66). However in the Philosophical Investigations the separate word 'Ähnlichkeit' has been translated as 'similarity' (§§11,130,185,444) and on two occasions (§§9,90) it is given as 'like'. The German family-word is common and it is found in Grimm's dictionary; a rare occurrence of 'family likeness' has been noted in a lecture by J. F. Moulton in 1877. see Griffin, N.: 1974, Wittgenstein, Universals and Family Resemblance, Canadian Journal of Philosophy III,635–651 

==Examples and quotes==
Games are the main example considered by Wittgenstein in his text where
he also mentions numbers and makes an analogy with a thread. He develops
his argument further by insisting that in such cases there is not a
clear cut boundary but there arises some ambiguity if this indefiniteness can be separated from the main point.
In §66 Wittgenstein invites us to 
The section mentions card games, board games, ball games, games like ring-a-ring-a-roses and concludes:

The following §67 begins by stating:

and extends the illustration

The problem of boundaries begins in §68

==Formal models==
There are some simple models Needham R., 1975, Polythetic classification: Convergence and consequences, Man 10 (1975) 349 Andersen H.,:2000, Kuhn's account of family resemblance, Erkenntnis 52: 313–337 
which can be derived from the text of §66-9. The most simple one, which fits Wittgenstein's exposition, seems to be the sorites type. It consists in a collection of items Item_1, Item_2, Item_3... described by features A, B, C, D, ...:

Item_1: A B C D 
Item_2: B C D E 
Item_3: C D E F 
Item_4: D E F G 
Item_5: E F G H 
......... . . . . 

In this example, which presents an indefinitely extended ordered family, resemblance is seen in shared features: each item shares three features with his neighbors e.g. Item_2 is like Item_1 in respects B, C, D, and like Item_3 in respects C, D, E. Obviously what we call 'resemblance' involves different aspects in each particular case. It is also seen to be of a different 'degree' and here it fades with 'distance': Item_1 and Item_5 have nothing in common.

Another simple model is described as:

Item_1: A B C 
Item_2: B C D 
Item_3: A C D 
Item_4: A B D 
It exhibits the presence of a constant degree of resemblance and the
absence of a common feature without extending to infinity.

Wittgenstein rejects the disjunction of features or 'properties', i.e. the set {A,B,C,D,..}, as something shared by all items. He admits that a 'sharing' is common to all but deems that it is only verbal:

==Notable applications==
*Morris Weitz first applied family resemblances in an attempt to describe art Weitz M., The Role of Theory in Aesthetics, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 62 (1953): 27. which opened a still continuing debate. Kaufman D., Family resemblances Relationism and the meaning of "art", British Journal of Aesthetics, vol. 47, No. 3, July 2007 

*Renford Bambrough proposed that 'Wittgenstein solved what is known as "the problem of universals"' and said of his solution (as Hume said of Berkeley's treatment of the same topic), that it is "one of the greatest and most valuable discoveries that has been made of late years in the republic of letters". Bambrough, R.: 1961, Universals and Family Resemblance, Proc. Aris. Soc. 61, 207–22 His view provided the occasion for numerous further comments. a recent summary in Blair D. (2006), Wittgenstein, Language and Information, p.118 (note 117); see also Dilman, I.: Universals: Bambrough on Wittgenstein, Aris. Soc. Proc., 79 (1978): 35–58; reprinted in John V. Canfi ed., The Philosophy of Wittgenstein, Vol. 5, Method and Essence, pp. 305–328. New York: Garland Publishing, 1986. 
*Rodney Needham explored family resemblances in connection with the problem of alliance and noted their presence in taxonomy where they are known as a polythetic classification 

*Eleanor Rosch used family resemblances in her cognitivist studies 
Rosch E. and Mervis, C. (1975) Family resemblances: studies in the internal structure of categories, Cognitive Psychology 7, 573-605;
Rosch, E. (1987), Wittgenstein and categorization research in cognitive psychology, in M. Chapman & R. Dixon (Eds.), Meaning and the growth of understanding. Wittgenstein's significance for developmental Psychology, Hillsdale, NJ.: Erlbaum. Other cognitive research has shown that children and even rhesus monkeys tend to use family resemblance relationships rather than explicit rules The connection between rule following and applying or extending a concept has been noted early in the discussion of family resemblances, see e.g. Pompa L., 'Family resemblance: a reply', The Philosophical Quarterly, 18 (1968) 347 when learning categories.

==Criticism and comments==

Philosophical Investigations is the primary text used in discussing family resemblances even though the topic appears also in
other Wittgenstein's works, notably The Brown Book. Wittgenstein
L., The Blue and Brown Books, London: Blackwell (1958);I 68, 17, 73 Most contributions to the discussion are by people involved in philosophical research but concern with more pragmatic questions such as taxonomy or information processing Blair D., Wittgenstein, Language and Information, Berlin:Springer, 2006, ISBN 978-1-4020-4112-9 sometimes motivates the comments. Hans Sluga has observed that "the notion of family resemblance... draws on two quite different sets of ideas, two different vocabularies, but treats them as if they were one and the same. The first is the vocabulary of kinship, of descent, of some sort of real and causal connection.. the second is that of similarity, resemblance, affinity and correspondence." Sluga H., Family Resemlance, Grazer Philosophische Studien 71 (2006) 14 

The main focus for criticism is the notion of similarity which is
instrumental for family resemblance. A similarity is always found for
two arbitrarily selected objects, or a series of intermediaries can link
them into a family. This problem has been known as underdeterminacy or
open ended texture. Admittedly infinity is only potential but for any
finite family some common element can be pointed out, especially if
relational properties are taken into consideration.
Wittgenstein's insistence that boundaries do not really exist but can
be traced arbitrarily has been described as conventionalism and more generally the acceptance of his conception has been seen to present a refined nominalism.

==See also==
* Prototype theory
* Polythetic term

==Notes==

==References==
*

*Andersen H.,: 2000, Kuhn's account of family resemblance, Erkenntnis 52: 313–337
*Bambrough, R.: 1961, Universals and Family Resemblance, Proc. Arist. Soc. 61, 207–22
*Beardsmore, R. W.: 1992, The Theory of Family Resemblance, Philosophical Investigations 15, 131–146
*Bellaimey, J. E.: 1990, Family Resemblances and the Problem of the Under-Determination of Extension, Philosophical Investigations 13, 31–43.
* Ginzburg C.,: 2004, Family Resemblances and Family Trees: Two Cognitive Metaphors, Critical Inquiry, Vol. 30, No. 3 (Spring 2004), pp. 537-556
*Griffin, N.: 1974, Wittgenstein, Universals and Family Resemblance, Canadian Journal of Philosophy III, 635–651.
*Gupta, R. K.: 1970, Wittgenstein's Theory of "Family Resemblance", in his Philosophical Investigations (Secs. 65–80), Philosophia Naturalis 12, 282–286
*Huff D.:(1981), Family Resemblances and rule governed behavior, Philosophical Investigations 4 (3) 1–23
*Kaufman D.: 2007, Family resemblances Relationism and the meaning of "art", British Journal of Aesthetics, vol. 47, No. 3, July 2007, 
*Prien B.: Family Resemblances-A Thesis about the Change of Meaning over Time, Kriterion 18 (2004), pp. 15–24.
*Raatzsch R., Philosophical Investigations 65ff. :On Family Resemblance, in Essays on Wittgenstein by P. Philipp and R. Raatzsch, Working papers from the Wittgenstein Archives at the University of Bergen #6 (1993), pp. 50–76
*Wennerberg, H.: 1967, The Concept of Family Resemblance in Wittgenstein's Later Philosophy, Theoria 33, 107–132.

==External links==
*Lois Shawver's comments on Philosophical Investigations §65-9 


