[[Great Dismal Swamp]]

Photograph of Lake Drummond, Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge, Virginia
The Great Dismal Swamp is a marshy area in the Coastal Plain Region of southeastern Virginia and northeastern North Carolina, between Norfolk, Virginia, and Elizabeth City, North Carolina. It is located in parts of southern Virginia cities Chesapeake and Suffolk and northern North Carolina Gates, Pasquotank, and Camden Counties. It is a southern swamp, one of many along the Atlantic Ocean's coast, including the Everglades and Big Cypress Swamp in Florida, the Okefenokee Swamp in Georgia, the Congaree and Four Holes swamps of South Carolina, and some of the Carolina bays in the Carolinas and Georgia. Along the eastern edge runs the Dismal Swamp Canal, completed in 1805. It is one of the last large and wild areas remaining in the Eastern United States.

Some estimates place the size of the original swamp at over 1000000 acre, stretching from Norfolk, Virginia, to Edenton, North Carolina. The Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge was created in 1973 when the Union Camp Corporation of Franklin, Virginia, donated 49,100 acres (200 km²) of land after centuries of logging and other human activities devastated the swamp's ecosystems. The refuge was officially established through the Dismal Swamp Act of 1974.

The refuge consists of over 112,000 acres (500 km²) of forested wetlands. Lake Drummond, a 3,100-acre (13-km²) natural lake, is located in the heart of the swamp. The lake, a remarkably circular body of water, is one of only two natural lakes in Virginia.

Outside the boundaries of the refuge, the state of North Carolina has preserved and protected additional portions of the swamp through the establishment of the Dismal Swamp State Park. The park protects 22 square miles of forested wetland. 

==History==
A late 19th-century depiction of fugitive slaves in the Great Dismal Swamp
Scientists believe the Great Dismal Swamp was created upon the last major shift of the continental shelf. The origin of Lake Drummond, one of only two natural lakes in Virginia, is not entirely clear; Native American legends tell of a giant firebird that made a nest of fire in the swamp that later filled with rain. Traylor, Waverley (2010). The Great Dismal Swamp in Myth and Legend, p. 214. Dorrance Publishing. 

Archaeological evidence suggests people have inhabited the swamp for 13,000 years. In 1650, Native Americans lived in the swamp; in 1665, William Drummond, the first governor of North Carolina, discovered the swamp's lake, which was subsequently named for him. Harper, Raymond L. (2008). A History of Chesapeake, Virginia, pp. 124-28. The History Press. In 1728, William Byrd II, while leading a land survey to establish a boundary between the Virginia and North Carolina colonies, made many observations of the swamp, none of them favorable; he is credited with naming it the Dismal Swamp. In 1763, George Washington visited the area, and he and others founded the Dismal Swamp Company in a venture to drain the swamp and clear it for settlement, Grizzard, Frank E., Jr. (2002). George Washington: A Biographical Companion, pp. 86-87. ABC-CLIO. with the company later turning to the more profitable goal of timber harvesting. Traylor (2010), pp. 165-66. 

Several African American maroon societies lived in the Great Dismal Swamp during early American history. These maroons consisted of black runaway slaves seeking safety and liberty. Kate Taylor, The Thorny Path to a National Black Museum, The New York Times, January 22, 2011, Accessed January 23, 2011. The swamp's role in the history of slavery in the United States is reflected in Harriet Beecher Stowe's second novel, . The Underground Railroad Education Pavilion, an exhibit set up to educate visitors about the fugitive slaves who lived in the swamp, was opened February 24, 2012. 

The Dismal Swamp Canal was authorized by Virginia in 1787 and by North Carolina in 1790, with construction beginning in 1793 and completing in 1805. The canal, as well as a railroad constructed through part of the swamp in 1830, enabled the harvest of timber. The canal deteriorated after the Albemarle and Chesapeake Canal was completed in 1858; however, in 1929, the U. S. Government bought the Dismal Swamp Canal and began to improve it. The canal is now the oldest operating artificial waterway in the country. Like the Albemarle and Chesapeake Canals, it is part of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway. 

==Preservation==

Photograph of the reddish-colored sand of the shallow water on a calm day of Lake Drummond, Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge, Virginia
In the mid-20th century, conservation groups across America began demanding the preservation of the remaining Great Dismal Swamp. In 1973, the Union Camp Corporation, a paper company based in Franklin, Virginia, with large land holdings in the area, donated just over 49,000 acres (198 km²) of land to The Nature Conservancy, which the following year transferred the property to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Yarsinske, Amy Waters (2007). The Elizabeth River, pp. 328-29. The History Press. 

The Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge was officially established by the U.S. Congress through the Dismal Swamp Act of 1974. The refuge consists of almost 107,000 acres (433 km²) of forested wetlands, including the 3,100-acre Lake Drummond at its center.

The refuge's resource management programs aim to restore and maintain the natural biological diversity that once existed in the swamp, including its water resources, native vegetation communities, and wildlife species. Water control structures in the ditches help conserve and manage water, while forest management activities that simulate the ecological effects of wildfires are used to restore and maintain plant diversity. Wildlife is managed by ensuring the presence of required habitats, with hunting used to balance some wildlife populations with available food supplies.

==Today==
Locator map of the Great Dismal Swamp
The Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge lies wholly within the Middle Atlantic coastal forests ecoregion. The refuge harbors a wide range of plant and animal species. Bald cypress, tupelo, maple, Atlantic white cypress, and pine, among other tree species found on the refuge, support the fauna within. The swamp is home to many mammals, including black bear, bobcat, otter, and weasel, as well as over 70 species of reptiles and amphibians. More than 200 bird species can be seen within the swamp throughout the year; 96 of these are known to nest on the refuge. 

Lake Drummond is the center of activity in the swamp today, attracting fishermen, sightseers, and boaters. Camping is not allowed on the refuge, but is allowed on the Lake Drummond Reservation, a Corps of Engineers site, located at the Feeder Ditch spillway. Access to this site is only possible by boat.

==References==
 

==External links==

*Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge Official Site
*GORP's guide to The Great Dismal Swamp
*Dismal Swamp Canal Welcome Center
*Defenders of Wildlife Organization - Great Dismal Swamp page
*Bonny Blue Dismal Swamp Canal Trip
*Elizabeth City Area Convention & Visitors Bureau
*Historical and Photo Documentary of the Great Dismal Swamp

 
