[[Guggenheim Museum Bilbao]]

The Guggenheim Museum Bilbao is a museum of modern and contemporary art, designed by Canadian-American architect Frank Gehry, and located in Bilbao, Basque Country, Spain. The museum was inaugurated on 18 October 1997 by King Juan Carlos I of Spain.

It is built alongside the Nervion River, which runs through the city of Bilbao to the Cantabrian Sea. The Guggenheim is one of several museums belonging to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation. The museum features permanent and visiting exhibits of works by Spanish and international artists.

One of the most admired works of contemporary architecture, the building has been hailed as a "signal moment in the architectural culture", because it represents "one of those rare moments when critics, academics, and the general public were all completely united about something." The museum was the building most frequently named as one of the most important works completed since 1980 in the 2010 World Architecture Survey among architecture experts. 

==History==
In 1991, the Basque government suggested to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation that it would fund a Guggenheim museum to be built in Bilbao's decrepit port area, once the city's main source of income. Templer, Karen. "Frank Gehry", Salon, October 5, 1999, accessed March 27, 2012 "Guggenheim Museum Bilbao", The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, accessed April 4, 2012 Security tight before Guggenheim Museum opens in Basque city, CNN, October 18, 1997 The Basque government agreed to cover the US$100 million construction cost, to create a US$50 million acquisitions fund, to pay a one-time US$20 million fee to the Guggenheim and to subsidize the museum's US$12 million annual budget. In exchange, the Foundation agreed to manage the institution, rotate parts of its permanent collection through the Bilbao museum and organize temporary exhibitions. Riding, Alan. "A Gleaming New Guggenheim for Grimy Bilbao", The New York Times, 24 June 1997. 

The museum was built by Ferrovial, Ferrovial history at a cost of US$89 million. Ouroussoff, Nicolai. "The Architect's New Museum in Bilbao, Spain, Emerges as a Testament to One Man's Optimism Amid a Landscape of Industrial Decay", Los Angeles Times, 2 June 1997. About 5,000 residents of Bilbao attended a preopening extravaganza outside the museum on the night preceding the official opening, featuring an outdoor light show and concerts. On October 18, 1997, the museum was opened by Juan Carlos I of Spain. 

==Building==
The museum is clad in glass, titanium, and limestone
The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation selected Frank Gehry as the architect, and its director, Thomas Krens, encouraged him to design something daring and innovative. Gehry, Frank. Frank Gehry Talks Architecture and Process (New York: Rizolli, 1999), p. 20 The curves on the exterior of the building were intended to appear random; the architect said that "the randomness of the curves are designed to catch the light". The interior "is designed around a large, light-filled atrium with views of Bilbao's estuary and the surrounding hills of the Basque country." Walsh, John. "The priceless Peggy Guggenheim", The Independent, October 21, 2009, accessed March 12, 2012 The atrium, which Gehry nicknamed The Flower because of its shape, serves as the organizing center of the museum. 

When the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao opened to the public in 1997, it was immediately hailed as one of the world's most spectacular buildings in the style of Deconstructivism (although Gehry does not associate himself with that architectural movement), a masterpiece of the 20th century. Tompkins, Calvin. "The Maverick", The New Yorker, July 7, 1997, accessed March 13, 2012 Architect Philip Johnson described it as "the greatest building of our time", Tyrnauer, Matt. "Architecture in the Age of Gehry", Vanity Fair, August 2010, accessed March 27, 2012 while critic Calvin Tomkins, in The New Yorker, characterized it as "a fantastic dream ship of undulating form in a cloak of titanium," its brilliantly reflective panels also reminiscent of fish scales. Herbert Muschamp praised its "mercurial brilliance" in The New York Times Magazine. Muschamp, Herbert. "The Miracle in Bilbao", The New York Times Magazine, September 7, 1997, accessed April 4, 2012 The Independent calls the museum "an astonishing architectural feat". The building inspired other structures of similar design across the globe, such as the Cerritos Millennium Library in Cerritos, California.

The museum is seamlessly integrated into the urban context, unfolding its interconnecting shapes of stone, glass and titanium on a 32,500-square-meter site along the Nervión River in the old industrial heart of the city; while modest from street level, it is most impressive when viewed from the river. With a total 24,000 m², of which 11,000 are dedicated to exhibition space, it had more exhibition space than the three Guggenheim collections in New York and Venice combined at that time. Eleven thousand square meters of exhibition space are distributed over nineteen galleries, ten of which follow a classic orthogonal plan that can be identified from the exterior by their stone finishes. The remaining nine galleries are irregularly shaped and can be identified from the outside by their swirling organic forms and titanium cladding. The largest gallery measures 30 meters wide and 130 meters long. In 2005, it housed Richard Serra's monumental installation The Matter of Time, which Robert Hughes dubbed "courageous and sublime". Hughes, Robert, "Man of Steel", The Guardian, June 22, 2005, accessed March 27, 2012 

The museum by night, November 2007
The building was constructed on time and budget, which is rare for architecture of this type. In an interview in Harvard Design Magazine, Gehry explained how he did it. First, he ensured that what he calls the "organization of the artist" prevailed during construction, to prevent political and business interests from interfering with the design. Second, he made sure he had a detailed and realistic cost estimate before proceeding. Third, he used computer visualizations produced by his own Digital Project software and collaborated closely with the individual building trades to control costs during construction.

KLM Royal Dutch Airlines donated $1,000,000 towards its construction.

==Exhibitions==
The museum notably houses "large-scale, site-specific works and installations by contemporary artists, such as Richard Serra's 340 ft-long Snake, and displays the work of Basque artists, "as well as housing a selection of works" from the Foundation's modern art collection. In 1997, the museum opened with "The Guggenheim Museums and the Art of This Century", a 300-piece overview of 20th-century art from Cubism to new media art. Most pieces came from the Guggenheim's permanent collection, but the museum also acquired paintings by Willem de Kooning, Mark Rothko and Clyfford Still and commissioned new works by Francesco Clemente, Anselm Kiefer, Jenny Holzer and Richard Serra. 

The exhibitions change often; the museum generally hosts thematic exhibitions, centered for example on Chinese or Russian art. Traditional paintings and sculptures are a minority compared to installations and electronic forms. The highlight of the collection, and its only permanent exhibit, is The Matter of Time (incorporating an earlier work, Snake), a series of weathering steel sculptures designed by Serra, which is housed in the 430 ft Arcelor Gallery (formerly known as the Fish Gallery but renamed in 2005 for the steel manufacturer that sponsored the project). Bird's-eye rendering of the Arcelor Gallery with layout of installation "The Matter of Time", Artnet News, accessed April 14, 2012 The collections usually highlight Avant-garde art, 20th century abstraction, and non-objective art. When the museum announced the 2011 exhibition "The Luminous Interval", a show of artwork belonging to Greek businessman Dimitris Daskalopoulos, who is also a museum trustee, this met with criticism of, among other things, too much curatorial power for a serious benefactor. Vogel, Carol. "Guggenheim Defends Show of Trustee’s Art", The New York Times, December 16, 2010. 
In 2012 Hockney: A Bigger Picture" in Bilbao|David Hockney's exhibition] drew over 290,000 visitors to the museum.

File:Richard Serra-The Matter of Time.jpg|The Matter of Time by Richard Serra in the Arcelor Gallery
File:Koonsballoonsbilbao.jpg|Tulips by Jeff Koons
File:A Bibao - Puppy - de Jeff Koons.jpg|Puppy by Jeff Koons in front of the museum

==Economic and media impact==
The museum was opened as part of a revitalization effort for the city of Bilbao. Almost immediately after its opening, the Guggenheim Bilbao became a popular tourist attraction, drawing visitors from around the globe. In its first three years, almost 4 million tourists visited the museum, helping to generate about €500 million in economic activity. The regional council estimated that the money visitors spent on hotels, restaurants, shops and transport allowed it to collect €100 million in taxes, which more than paid for the building cost. Crawford, Leslie. "Guggenheim, Bilbao, and the 'hot banana'", Financial Times, September 4, 2001. The so-called "Bilbao effect" refers to how the museum transformed the city. The term, however, has also been employed by critics who have denounced the museum as a symbol of gentrification and cultural imperialism. Hedgecoe, Guy. "Bilbao's Guggenheim continues to divide", Deutsche Welle, June 6, 2012. The Wall Street Journal suggested that the Bilbao effect should be called the Bilbao anomaly, "for the iconic chemistry between the design of building, its image and the public turns out to be rather rare." Rybczynski, Witold. When Buildings Try Too Hard, Wall Street Journal, November 22, 2008. 

Aerial view of the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao
The building has featured in the 1999 James Bond film The World Is Not Enough in the pre-title sequence and the 2007 Tamil film , in which it is the setting for the song Style, composed by A.R. Rahman. Skin Grafting in 'Sivaji', India Glitz Mariah Carey's music video "Sweetheart", directed by Hype Williams, shows singers Dupri and Carey in various locations at the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao. The building is also featured in the computer game SimCity 4 as a buildable landmark.

==Management and 2007 embezzlement incident==
According to a report issued in 2007 by the Basque Court of Auditors, the museum paid more than US$27 million for the acquisition of art between 2002 and 2005, including Serra's 'The Matter of Time' for the cavernous ground-floor gallery. Picard, Charmaine. "Guggenheim Bilbao director admits to €4.2m loss", The Art Newspaper, August 14, 2008. After another audit in 2008 revealed that money was missing from accounts, Harris, Rachel Lee. "Bilbao Museum Official Sentenced", The New York Times, November 29, 2009. the Foundation said that it filed a case against the director, Roberto Cearsolo Barrenetxea, "for financial and accounting irregularities", asserting that he had admitted diverting money from two companies that manage the Guggenheim Bilbao building and its art collection Nayeri, Farah. Bilbao Says Its Finance Director Embezzled US$775,000, Bloomberg, April 17, 2008. to his own account since 1998. Van Gelder, Lawrence. "Embezzlement at Guggenheim Bilbao", The New York Times, April 17, 2008. 

== See also ==
* 12 Treasures of Spain
* Guggenheim family
* The Globalized City, a publication doing case studies on the museum as a large scale development project

== References ==

==External links==

*Google Maps satellite view of Guggenheim Museum Bilbao
*Scholars on Bilbao - academic works that analyse Bilbao's urban regeneration
* Guggenheim Museum Bilbao - Project for Public Spaces Hall of Shame
* Pictures of the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao
* Guggenheim Museum in an artistic short movie
* Bilbao. Basque Pathways to Globalization, an analysis of the relationships between the city of Bilbao and globalization.


