[[Gulf of Fonseca]]

Gulf of Fonseca Satellite Image, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 2001
Map showing position of the Gulf (bottom left) with respect to Honduras, El Salvador and Nicaragua

The Gulf of Fonseca (), part of the Pacific Ocean, is a gulf in Central America, bordering El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua.

==History==
Fonseca Bay was discovered in 1522 by Gil Gonzalez de Avila, and named by him after his patron, Archbishop Juan Fonseca, the implacable enemy of Columbus. 

In 1849, E. G. Squier negotiated a treaty for the United States to build a canal across Honduras from the Caribbean Sea to the Gulf. Frederick Chatfield, the British commander in Central America, was afraid that American presence in Honduras would destabilize the British Mosquito Coast, and sent his fleet to occupy El Tigre Island at the entrance to the Gulf. Shortly thereafter, however, Squier demanded the British leave, since he had anticipated the occupation and negotiated the island's temporary cession to the United States. Chatfield could only comply.

All three countries&mdash;Honduras, El Salvador, and Nicaragua&mdash;with coastline along the Gulf have been involved in a lengthy dispute over the rights to the Gulf and the islands located within. In 1992, a chamber of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) decided the Land, Island and Maritime Frontier Dispute, of which the Gulf dispute was a part. The ICJ determined that El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua were to share control of the Gulf of Fonseca. El Salvador was awarded the islands of Meanguera and Meanguerita, while Honduras was awarded El Tigre island.

==Physical geography==
The Gulf of Fonseca covers an area of approximately , with a coastline that extends for , of which are in Honduras, in Nicaragua, and in El Salvador.

The climate in the Gulf is typical of tropical and subtropical regions, with two distinct seasons, the rainy and the dry. The Gulf receives nearly 80% of its total yearly rainfall of during the rainy season from May to November. Honduran Secretariat of Industry and Commerce, 2002: 23 The dry season occurs between December and May and contributes to an annual evaporation rate of . As a result of less water flowing into the Gulf, the currents tend to flow inward from the Pacific Ocean, and levels of salinity in the estuaries increase, and seasonal drought occurs. El Comité para la Defensa y Desarrollo de la Flora y Fauna del Golfo de Fonseca (CODDEFFAGOLF), 2001: 10 

Temperatures in the Gulf average between 25 and 30 °C; March and April are the warmest months and November and December the coolest. Relative humidity varies between 65 and 86% depending on location. In contrast, the interior of the country is semi-tropical and cooler with an average temperature of 26 °C. Honduran Secretariat of Industry and Commerce, 2002: 14 

The vegetation of the wetland ecosystem is dominated by species of mangroves. Of the six species of mangrove identified in the Gulf, Red Mangrove (Rhizophora mangle) is the most common, mostly occupying the areas permanently inundated by the tides. Black Mangrove (Bruguiera gymnorrhiza) is the second most pervasive species and is generally found around the rivers where sediments are deposited along the shoreline. White Mangrove (Laguncularia racemosa) is the third most dominant, followed by Botoncillo (Conocarpus erectus); both are generally found further inland and are inundated by the tide less frequently. The dominance of different species over others correlates with the frequency of floods, water quality, and levels of salinity. Sanchez, 1999: 13 

The cycle of tides is on average per day in the Gulf. During low tides the soils are inhabited by crabs, conch, and other species. During the high tide the mangrove forests serve as a feeding ground and habitat for fish, shrimp, and other species, as the root structure of mangroves provide a refuge from larger predators. CODDEFFAGOLF, 2001: 14 

==References==

* Footnotes to history
* UNESCO
* Land, Island and Maritime Frontier Dispute (El Salvador/Honduras: Nicaragua intervening), International Court of Justice case registry
* Application for Revision of the Judgment of 11 September 1992 in the Case concerning the Land, Island and Maritime Frontier Dispute (El Salvador/Honduras: Nicaragua intervening) (El Salvador v. Honduras), International Court of Justice case registry

Fonseca


