[[Immanuel Wallerstein]]

Immanuel Maurice Wallerstein (New York City, September 28, 1930), is an American sociologist, historical social scientist, and world-systems analyst. His bimonthly commentaries on world affairs are syndicated. Agence Global 

==Early Life, Education, and Academic Career==
Wallerstein first became interested in world affairs as a teenager in New York City, and was particularly interested in the Indian independence movement at the time. At Columbia University, he received all three of his degrees: a B.A. in 1951, a M.A. in 1954 and a PhD degree in 1959. However Wallerstein also studied at other universities around the world, including Oxford, Université libre de Bruxelles, Universite Paris 7-Denis-Diderot, and Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. In between 1951 to 1953, Wallerstein also served in the U.S Army. Eleven years later, on May 25, 1964, he married Beatrice Friedman and with her had a daughter. 

Wallerstein's academic and professional career begin at Columbia University where he started as an instructor and became an associate professor of sociology between 1958 to 1971. During his time there, he also served as a prominent supporter of the students during the Columbia University protests of 1968. By 1971, he moved to Montreal where he taught at McGill University for five years. 

In 1973 he was president of the African Studies Association and as of 1976, he served as a distinguished professor of sociology at Binghamton University until his retirement in 1999. He also became head of the Fernand Braudel Center for the Study of Economies, Historical Systems and Civilization at Binghamton University until 2005. 

Wallerstein has held visiting professor posts in the Chinese University of Hong Kong, British Columbia, and Amsterdam., was awarded multiple honorary titles, intermittently served as Directeur d'études associé at the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales in Paris, and was president of the International Sociological Association between 1994 and 1998. Similarly, during the 1990s he chaired the Gulbenkian Commission on the Restructuring of the Social Sciences. The object of the commission was to indicate a direction for social scientific inquiry for the next 50 years. 

Since 2000, he has been Senior Research Scholar at Yale University. He is also a member of the Advisory Editors Council of the Social Evolution & History journal. In 2003 he received the Career of Distinguished Scholarship Award from the American Sociological Association. In 2004 he was awarded with the Gold Kondratieff Medal The International N. D. Kondratieff Foundation by the International N. D. Kondratieff Foundation and the Russian Academy of Natural Sciences (RAEN).

==Theory==
Wallerstein began as an expert of post-colonial African affairs, which he selected as the focus of his studies after an international youth conference in 1951. His publications were almost exclusively devoted to this until the early 1970s, when he began to distinguish himself as a historian and theorist of the global capitalist economy on a macroscopic level. His early criticism of global capitalism and championship of "anti-systemic movements" have recently made him an éminence grise with the anti-globalization movement within and outside of the academic community, along with Noam Chomsky and Pierre Bourdieu.

His most important work, The Modern World-System, has appeared in four volumes in 1974, 1980, 1989 and 2011, with two planned volumes still forthcoming. In it, Wallerstein mainly draws on several intellectual influences:

* Karl Marx, whom he follows in emphasizing underlying economic factors and their dominance over ideological factors in global politics, and whose economic thinking he has adopted with such ideas as the dichotomy between capital and labor, the view of world economic development through stages such as feudalism and capitalism, belief in the accumulation of capital, dialectics and more;

* Dependency theory, most obviously its concepts of "core" and "periphery";

However Wallerstein categorizes Frantz Fanon, Fernand Braudel, and Ilya Prigogine as the three individuals that have had the most impact "in modifying my line of argument (as opposed to deepening a parallel line of argument)." Wallerstein chronologically lists three individuals and describes their influence in his views:

* Frantz Fanon: "Fanon represented for me the sharp culmination of the insistence by the persons left out in the modern world‑system that they have a voice, a vision, and a claim not merely to justice but to intellectual valuation." 

* Fernand Braudel: who had described the development and political implications of extensive networks of economic exchange in the European world between 1400 and 1800, "made me conscious, as no one else did, of the central importance of the social construction of time and space, and its impact on our analyses." 

* Ilya Prigogine: "Prigogine forced me to face all the implications of a world in which certainties did not exist but knowledge still did." 

Wallerstein has also stated that another major influence on his work was the 'world revolution' of 1968. He was on the faculty of Columbia University at the time of the student uprising there and participated in a faculty committee that attempted to resolve the dispute. He has argued in several works that this revolution marked the end of 'liberalism' as a viable ideology in the modern world system. Wallerstein certainly deserves credit for is his anticipating the growing importance of the North-South divide at a time when the main world conflict was the Cold War.

He has argued since 1980 that the United States is a 'hegemon in decline'. He was often mocked for making this claim during the 1990s, but since the Iraq War this argument has become more widespread. Overall, Wallerstein sees the development of the capitalist world economy as detrimental to a large proportion of the world's population. Paul Halsall Modern History Sourcebook: Summary of Wallerstein on World System Theory, August 1997 Similar to Marx, Wallerstein predicts that capitalism will be replaced by a socialist economy. Carlos A. Martínez-Vela, World Systems Theory, paper prepared for the Research Seminar in Engineering Systems, November 2003 

Wallerstein's theory has also provoked harsh criticism, not only from neo-liberal or conservative circles but even some historians who say that some of his assertions may be historically incorrect. Some critics suggest that Wallerstein tends to neglect the cultural dimension, reducing it to what some call "official" ideologies of states which can then easily be revealed as mere agencies of economic interest. Nevertheless his analytical approach, along with that of associated theorists such as Andre Gunder Frank, Terence Hopkins, Samir Amin, Christopher Chase-Dunn and Giovanni Arrighi has made a significant impact and established an institutional base devoted to the general approach. It has also attracted strong interest from the anti-globalization movement.

Wallerstein has both participated in and written about the World Social Forum.

===The Modern World-System===

Wallerstein's first volume on world-system theory (The Modern World System, 1974) was predominantly written during a year at Princeton's Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. In it he argues that the modern world system is distinguished from empires by its reliance on economic control of the world order by a dominating capitalist center in systemic economic and political relation to peripheral and semi peripheral world areas. 

Wallerstein rejects the notion of a "Third World", claiming there is only one world connected by a complex network of economic exchange relationships — i.e., a "world-economy" or "world-system" in which the "dichotomy of capital and labor" and the endless "accumulation of capital" by competing agents (historically including but not limited to nation-states) account for frictions. This approach is known as the World Systems Theory.

Wallerstein locates the origin of the "modern world-system" in 16th-century Western Europe and the Americas. An initially only slight advance in capital accumulation in Britain, the Dutch Republic and France, due to specific political circumstances at the end of the period of feudalism, set in motion a process of gradual expansion. As a result only one global network or system of economic exchange exists. By the 19th century, virtually every area on earth was incorporated into the capitalist world-economy.

The capitalist world-system is far from homogeneous in cultural, political and economic terms — instead characterized by fundamental differences in social development, accumulation of political power and capital. Contrary to affirmative theories of modernization and capitalism, Wallerstein does not conceive of these differences as mere residues or irregularities that can and will be overcome as the system evolves.

A lasting division of the world into core, semi-periphery and periphery is an inherent feature of the world-system. Areas which have so far remained outside the reach of the world-system enter it at the stage of 'periphery'. There is a fundamental and institutionally stabilized 'division of labor' between core and periphery: while the core has a high level of technological development and manufactures complex products, the role of the periphery is to supply raw materials, agricultural products and cheap labor for the expanding agents of the core. Economic exchange between core and periphery takes place on unequal terms: the periphery is forced to sell its products at low prices but has to buy the core's products at comparatively high prices. This unequal state which once established tends to stabilize itself due to inherent, quasi-deterministic constraints. The statuses of core and periphery are not exclusive and fixed geographically; instead they are relative to each other: there is a zone called 'semi-periphery' which acts as a periphery to the core and a core to the periphery. At the end of the 20th century, this zone would comprise, Eastern Europe, China, Brazil or Mexico. Peripheral and core zones can also co-exist in the same place.

One effect of the expansion of the world-system is the commodification of things, including human labor. Natural resources, land, labor and human relationships are gradually being stripped of their "intrinsic" value and turned into commodities in a market which dictates their exchange value.

In the last two decades, Wallerstein has increasingly focused on the intellectual foundations of the modern world system, the 'structures of knowledge' defined by the disciplinary division between sociology, anthropology, political science, economics and the humanities and the pursuit of universal theories of human behavior. Wallerstein regards the structures of knowledge as Eurocentric. In analyzing them, he has been highly influenced by the 'new sciences' of theorists like Ilya Prigogine.

==Terms and Definitions==

Capitalist World-System
This definition of Wallerstein follows Dependency Theory, which intended to combine the developments of the different societies since the 16th century in different regions into one collective development. The main characteristic of Wallerstein's definition is the development of a global division of labour, including the existence of independent political units (in this case, states) at the same time. There is no political centre, compared to global empires like the Roman Empire; instead the capitalist world system is identified with the global market economy. It is divided into core, semi-periphery and periphery, and is ruled by the capitalist method of production.

Core/Periphery
Defines the difference between developed countries and developing countries, characterized e.g. by power or wealth. The core refers to developed countries, and the periphery is a synonym for the dependent developing countries. The main reason for the position of the developed countries is economic power.

Semi-periphery
Defines states that are located between core and periphery, they benefit from the periphery through unequal exchange relations. At the same time, the core benefits from the semi-periphery through unequal exchange relations.

Quasi-monopolies
Defines a kind of monopoly where there is more than one service provider for a particular good/service. Wallerstein claims that quasi-monopolies are self-liquidating because new sellers go into the market by exerting political pressure to open markets to competition. 

Kondratiev Waves
Defines a cyclical tendency in the world's economy. It is also known as a supercycle. Wallerstein argues that global wars are tied to Kondratiev waves. According to him, global conflicts occur as the summer phase of a wave begins, this is when production of goods and services all around the world are on an upswing. 

==Works==

 Year Title Author(s) Publisher 
 1961 Africa, The Politics of Independence Immanuel Wallerstein New York: Vintage Books 
 1964 The Road to Independence: Ghana and the Ivory Coast Immanuel Wallerstein Paris & The Hague: Mouton 
 1967 Africa: The Politics of Unity Immanuel Wallerstein New York: Random House 
 1969 University in Turmoil: The Politics of Change Immanuel Wallerstein New York: Atheneum 
 1972 Africa: Tradition & Change Immanuel Wallerstein with Evelyn Jones Rich New York: Random House 
 1974 The Modern World-System, vol. I: Capitalist Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century Immanuel Wallerstein New York/London: Academic Press 
 1979 The Capitalist World-Economy Immanuel Wallerstein Cambridge University Press 
 1980 The Modern World-System, vol. II: Mercantilism and the Consolidation of the European World-Economy, 1600-1750 Immanuel Wallerstein New York: Academic Press 
 1982 World-Systems Analysis: Theory and Methodology Immanuel Wallerstein with Terence K. Hopkins et al. Beverly Hills: Sage 
 1982 Dynamics of Global Crisis Immanuel Wallerstein with Samir Amin, Giovanni Arrighi and Andre Gunder Frank London: Macmillan 
 1983 Historical Capitalism Immanuel Wallerstein London: Verso 
 1984 The Politics of the World-Economy. The States, the Movements and the Civilizations Immanuel Wallerstein Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
 1986 Africa and the Modern World Immanuel Wallerstein Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press 
 1989 The Modern World-System, vol. III: The Second Great Expansion of the Capitalist World-Economy, 1730-1840's Immanuel Wallerstein San Diego: Academic Press 
 1989 Antisystemic Movements Immanuel Wallerstein with Giovanni Arrighi and Terence K. Hopkins London: Verso 
 1990 Transforming the Revolution: Social Movements and the World-System Immanuel Wallerstein with Samir Amin, Giovanni Arrighi and Andre Gunder Frank New York: Monthly Review Press 
 1991 Race, Nation, Class: Ambiguous Identities Immanuel Wallerstein with Étienne Balibar London: Verso. 
 1991 Geopolitics and Geoculture: Essays on the Changing World-System Immanuel Wallerstein Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
 1991 Unthinking Social Science: The Limits of Nineteenth Century Paradigms Immanuel Wallerstein Cambridge: Polity 
 1995 After Liberalism Immanuel Wallerstein New York: New Press 
 1995 Historical Capitalism, with Capitalist Civilization Immanuel Wallerstein London: Verso 
 1998 Utopistics: Or, Historical Choices of the Twenty-first Century Immanuel Wallerstein New York: New Press 
 1999 The End of the World As We Know It: Social Science for the Twenty-first Century Immanuel Wallerstein Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press 
 2001 Democracy, Capitalism, and Transformation Immanuel Wallerstein Documenta 11, Vienna, March 16, 2001 
 2003 Decline of American Power: The U.S. in a Chaotic World Immanuel Wallerstein New York: New Press 
 2004 The Uncertainties of Knowledge Immanuel Wallerstein Philadelphia: Temple University Press 
 2004 World-Systems Analysis: An Introduction Immanuel Wallerstein Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press 
 2004 Alternatives: The U.S. Confronts the World Immanuel Wallerstein Boulder, Colorado: Paradigm Press 
 2006 European Universalism: The Rhetoric of Power Immanuel Wallerstein New York: New Press 
 2011 The Modern World-System, vol. IV: Centrist Liberalism Triumphant, 1789–1914 Immanuel Wallerstein Berkeley: University of California Press 
 2013 Uncertain Worlds: World-Systems Analysis in Changing Times Immanuel Wallerstein with Charles Lemert and Carlos Antonio Aguirre Rojas Herndon, VA: Paradigm Publishers 
 2013 Does Capitalism Have a Future? Immanuel Wallerstein with Randall Collins, Michael Mann, Georgi Derluguian and Craig Calhoun New York: Oxford University Press 

==See also==
*Dependency theory
*World system theory

==References==

==Further reading==
*Brewer, A., Marxist Theories of Imperialism: A Critical survey, London: Macmillan, 1990. 
*Frank, A.G. and B. Gills (eds), The World System: 500 years or 5000?, London: Routledge, 1993. 
*Hout, W., Capitalism and the Third World: Development, dependence and the world system, Hants: Edward Elgar, 1993. 
*Sanderson, S., Civilizations and World Systems, London: Sage, 1955.
*Shannon, T., An Introduction to the World-System Perspective, Oxford: Westview Press, 1989.

==External links==

*
*Immanuel Wallerstein's Official Website
*KPFA radio interview – November 12, 2008 at 12:00pm about the structural constraints faced by Obama and the current economic crisis.
*Presentation of I. Wallerstein's "Worldssystem Modell"
*Wallerstein's own fortnightly commentaries on current events
*Festschrift for Immanuel Wallerstein - Part I Journal of World-Systems Research, Vol. VI, Number 2, Summer/Fall 2000
*Festschrift for Immanuel Wallerstein - Part II Journal of World-Systems Research, Vol. VI, Number 3, Fall/Winter 2000
*"Modern History Sourcebook: Summary of Wallerstein on World System Theory"
*Introduction to Social Macrodynamics: Compact Macromodels of the World System Growth by Andrey Korotayev, Artemy Malkov, and Daria Khaltourina
*Wallerstein's World-Systems Theory
*Interview with Wallerstein (2008) on the End of Capitalism and World-Systems
*Immanuel Wallerstein's full CV pdf.

;Videos
*The United States facing its decline Conference given at the Université de Montréal Fall 2006 (in French)
*Major crisis still ahead, past one was minor (2009)
*Wallerstein's Unit of Analysis (2010)
*Capitalism is Reaching It's End (2011)


