[[Last Judgment (van der Weyden)]]

The Last Judgement, c. 1445–1450. 220cm x 548cm (excluding frames). Oil on oak, Hospices de Beaune
The six outer panels with the donors kneeling in the far wings

The Last Judgment (or the Beaune altarpiece) is a large polyptych altarpiece painted c. 1445–50 by the Early Flemish artist Rogier van der Weyden. It was executed in oil on oak panel, though parts have been transferred to canvas. The altarpiece was commissioned for the Hospices de Beaune in 1443 by Nicolas Rolin, Chancellor of the Duchy of Burgundy, and his second wife Guigone de Salins, who is buried in front of the altarpiece's original location in the hospice. Campbell (2004), 78 The polyptych is one of van der Weyden's most ambitious works, equal to his Prado Deposition, Escorial Crucifixion Diptych and his lost Justice of Trajan and Herkinbald. Campbell (2004), 26 It remains in the hospice today, although not in its original positioning; it was moved in the 20th century to shield it from light and better protect it from the near 300,000 visitors it receives annually

The Last Judgment is in poor condition. It has suffered from extensive paint loss, wearing and darkening of colours, and accumulated dirt. In addition a heavy layer of over-paint was applied during restoration. The outer panels have been cut apart so both sides could be shown simultaneously. Traditionally the inner wings would only be displayed on selected Sundays or church holidays.

The Last Judgment comprises 15 panels; nine inner and six outer views, and retains some of its original frames. The inner panels are arranged in two registers. The large central panel spans both and shows Christ seated in Judgement, seated on a rainbow with his feet resting on a golden globe. Below him the Archangel Michael holds a scale as he weighs souls. The panel on Christ's far right show the gates of heaven, that to his far left the entrance to hell. The panels of the lower register form a continuous landscape, with figures moving from the central panel to their final destination after their judgement.

==Commission==
Nicolas Rolin was appointed Chancellor of Burgundy by Philip the Good in 1422, a position he held for the next 33 years. At almost 70 years he was aware of his mortailty and sought to donate a public hospital for the poor. Smith (1981), 276 His tenure with the duke had made him a wealthy man, and he donated a large portion of his fortune to the foundation of the Hôtel-Dieu in Beaune. Vaughan (2012), 169 He wrote in August 1443; "disregarding all human concerns and in the interest of my salvation, desiring by a favourable trade to exchange for celestial goods temporal ones, that I might from divine goodness render those goods which are perishable for ones which are eternal … in gratitude for the goods which the Lord, source of all wealth, has heaped upon me, from now on and for always, I found a hospital." Smith (2004), 91 In the late 1450s, only a few years before he died, he added a provision to the charter the Mass for the dead be performed twice daily in the hospital. Lane (1989), 169 

Courtyard of the Hôtel-Dieu
Rolin committed to build a hospice either in Beaune or in his birthplace of Autun. Autun already had a hospital, Smith (1981), 275 and he may have wanted to gesture towards healing wounds between the Burgundians and the French, after the Treaty of Arras. France had been devastated by the Hundred Years' War. Massacres, however, continued with marauding bands (écorcheurs) still roaming the countryside, pillaging and destroying, provoking misery and famine. The majority of the people of Beaune were destitute, and the area had recently suffered an outbreak of plague. Blum (1969), 37 Having gained permission from Pope Eugene IV, the hospice was built and consecrated on 31 December 1452. In conjunction, Rolin established the "Les sœurs hospitalières de Beaune" religious order. Rolins dedicated the hospice (known as Hôtel-Dieu de Beaune) to St Anthony Abbot, commonly associated with sickness and healing in the Middle Ages. Hayum (1977), 508 

Rolin's wife, Guigone de Salins, played a major role in the foundation, as likely did his nephew Jan Rolin. De Salins in particular lived and served at the hospice until her own death in 1470. The building's design was probably overseen by the Flemish architect Jacques Wiscrère and remained as a hospital until the late 1970s. Blum (1969) "Un visite à l'Hôtel-Dieu de Beaune". Société d'histoire et d'archéologie de Beaune, 1912. 173-177 There is documentary record of a large range of Flemish and French masons, painters and glass cutters employed for its construction. The facade is today regarded as a superior example of Northern Renaissance civic architecture and a treasure trove of panel painting, given its numerous portraits of Rolin, his wife and members of his extended family. Sinclair (1990), 21 

The polyptych was commissioned to be the centerpiece for the chapel; and the documents about the arrangement of the commission survive. Rolin may have approached van der Weyden as early as 1443, when the hospital was founded; it was complete for the consecration in 1451. Lane (1989), 167 Van der Weyden painted it in his Brussels workshop, most likely with the aid of apprentices; upon completion the panels were transported to the hospice. Jacobs (1991), 60; Lane (1989), 167 It is unusual because the artist, patron, place of installation and date of completion have been identified for only a few Netherlandish altarpieces. It is first mentioned in a 1501 inventory, where it was positioned on the high altar. Campbell (2004), 74 Rolin knew the liturgy associated with the Mass for the dead, and he might have had knowledge of the treatment of the Last Judgment, with its association with the Mass, in 15th century Illuminated manuscripts. The Hours of Catherine of Cleves has a full-page Last Judgment with a similar placement for Christ, placed above the rising dead. Lane (1989), 176-177 

===Hospice===
Patients of the Hotel-Dieu in their Beds. Nurses attend the dying in folio 77 from the Livre de vie active, unknown artist 
The Hospices de Beaune consists of a pair of two-storied buildings arranged around a stone courtyard. The building wings are well preserved today, and contain half-timber galleries and ornate rooftops with dormer windows. The hospital is arranged so that the wings served the office, kitchen and apothecary functions. The nuns and patients were housed nearer the chapel, towards the center of the complex. Smith (2004), 92 In the 15th century medical care was expensive and primitive and the spiritual care of patients at least as important to attendants as the treatments of physical ailments. The inmates were typically placed two to a bed, as can be seen in the unattributed painting Patients of the Hôtel-Dieu in their Beds. Lane (1981), 171–72 

View of the Isenheim Altarpiece, Nikolaus Hagenauer and Matthias Grünewald, c 1512–1516
The outer panels on the lower register depict saints Sebastian and Anthony. Unusually for a triptych or polyptych exterior, neither saint was a patron of the donors. Instead they are included as representatives of healing; both were associated with bubonic plague and likely intended to reassure the dying, and as intercessors with the divine. Anthony, Beaune's dedicatory saint, was also a healing saint. Lane (1989), 170 Further St Michael had developed something of a cult following in 15th century France, mostly likely because he was said to have appeared to Joan of Arc. He was seen as guardian of the dead, all the more an acute role given the effect of plague, especially given the outbreaks there between 1441–42, just before Rolin's foundation of the hospital. Pilgrimage to Mont Saint-Michel in Normandy reached its peak around this time. Barbara Lane speculates that given that the patients at Beaune were unlikely to survive their stay at the hospice they could at least "gaze on his figure immediately above the altar of the chapel every time the altarpiece was opened. Like Saints Anthony and Sebastian on the exterior of the polyptych, the archangel offered … hope that they would overcome their physical ills." Lane (1989), 180 

The polyptych was intended to both comfort and warn the dying. It served as a moralising reminder for the dying to consider their faith and direct their final thoughts towards the divine, evident in its positioning in the chapel, within view of the patients' beds. Rolin specified that 30 beds be placed within sight of the altarpiece for those too ill to walk, Hayum (1977), 505 and the altarpiece be visible to the patients through a pierced screen. Lane (1989), 177–8 The moralising is apparent from some of its more overtly dark iconography, its choice of saints, and how the judge's scales tilt far more underneath the weight of the damned than the saved. Traditionally the damned were thought to be heavier than the saved as they carried the weight of sin. Further, the panels to Christ's left are more populated and less detailed than those to this right. In these ways it can be compared to Matthias Grünewald's Isenheim Altarpiece, which served much the same practical purpose, having been commissioned for the Monastery of St. Anthony in Isenheim which cared for the dying. 

==Description==
The work consists of 15 separate paintings on nine panels mostly painted on both sides, and, similar to Jan van Eyck's Ghent Altarpiece, is shaped in what Lynn Jacobs defines as an inverted T-shape. When closed, the elevated central panel makes the altarpiece look like an upside-down or inverted T, a shape popularly used in Early Netherlandish carved retables. Jacobs (1991), 33-35 Although seen less frequently in Netherlandish altarpieces, it served several important iconographical purposes. The elevated central panel provided space for a single large figure, a narrative of a scene depicting heaven, or a crucifixion scene with a cross extending high, as in van der Weyden's Descent from the Cross. The shape also reflected Gothic churches, in which naves extended past the aisles, and highlighted the iconography. Jacobs (1991), 36-37 With the shape of the altarpiece and the placement of the figures, van der Weyden strongly asserted the iconography associated with it. Jacobs (1991), 60-61 The interior panels presents the spiritual fate awaiting the viewers, either heaven or hell, salvation or damnation. Jacobs (2011), 111 The outer panels are firmly set in the earthly realm, with donors and sculpted grisaille saints. Craig Harbison explains that use of grisaille represents a movement from the outer earthly realm to the inner heavenly realm; and, that in Early Netherlandish panel paintings, the sculpted figures which function as the object prayers are always placed in the material world with the living donors, whereas the spiritual vision is shown on the inside panels. Harbison (1984), 106 

===Inner panels===

Similar to the Braque Triptych, Lynn Jacobs writes that here van der Weyden presents "the opened view as one unified whole spreading across the interior with the actual divisions between the panels seemingly ignored." Motifs and arrangements of figures extend along the lower panels from one to the next, and the separation between panels is ignored to the point that intersections cut through figures. Jacobs (2011), 97 The celestial sphere, towards which the dead aspire, is dramatically presented in the "radiant gold background, spanning almost the entire width of the altarpiece". According to Jacobs, the treatment of the panels as a whole and the "elimination of thresholds is quite remarkable and indeed astonishing in the history of the triptych." Jacobs (2011), 98 

Earth, hell, and the entrance to heaven are presented on the lowest levels, with the Deësis above. The large figure of Christ is elevated high, and is iconographically symbolic, showing the "reign of heaven is about to begin." The distinction between the earthly realm below and the heavenly above, the wide separation between heaven to the left and hell to the right, creates a strong "sense of order", according to Lane. Christ raised high above the altarpiece "exudes calm and control", and creates a sense of balance and movement throughout the other panels. The manner with which van der Weyden presents the resurrection of the dead across the five lower panels is reminiscent of a Gothic tympanum, specifically that at Autun Cathedral, which Rolin would have known. Lane (1989), 172 

====Upper register and central panel====
Jesus Christ and the Archangel Michael in judgement. The blessed are to their right, the condemned to their left

Jesus sits in judgment on the top of the center panel. A lily is placed to his right and a sword to his left. He is perched on a rainbow which extends across two panels, his feet rest on a sphere. His left hand is lowered, as his right is raised in the act of blessing. The position of his hands indicates the act of judgement, as to whether the souls below should be sent to Heaven or Hell, Upton (1989), 39 and echo the direction and positioning of the scales held by the Archangel Michael beneath him. His palms are open, revealing the wounds sustained when they were nailed to the cross, while his cope is open in places and we can see the wound caused by the lance, from which deep-red blood pours. McNamee (1998), 181 Christ's face is identical to the representation in van der Weyden's Braque Triptych, completed just a few years later in 1452. Blum (1969), 30 Adjacent to Jesus, the two upper register wings show two angels holding symbols of the passion, including a lance, a crown of thorns, and a stick and sponge soaked in vinegar. Both are dressed in liturgical vestments, each is dressed in an alb and amice, and one wears a deacon's peaked hat. 

Below Christ, the Archangel Michael, as the embodiment of divine justice, is the central focus. Because here he stands on the ground beneath Christ, he is the only saint to straddle both the heavens and the earth. He wears a dispassionate expression as he holds a scale to weighs souls, which is tipping up for the blessed and down for the damned. He is depicted using the iconographic elements associated with paintings of the Last Judgment and is by far the most beautifully and colourfully painted figure, clothed in a shining white alb, and a red cope with woven golden fabrics. He appears to be stepping forward towards the viewer, giving the illusion of judging not only the souls in the painting but the worshippers gazing at him, Lane (1989), 177 adding to the Eucharistic aspect of his role in the overall iconography. Jacobs (2011), 112 Micheal is surrounded by four cherubs playing trumpets to call the dead to their final destination.

File:Rogier van der Weyden - The Last Judgment (detail) - WGA25634.jpg|Angels holding symbols of the passion
File:Rogier van der Weyden - The Last Judgment (detail) - WGA25645.jpg|Deësis to Christ's left
File:Rogier_van_der_Weyden_002.jpg|Two Angels carrying the pillar Christ was scourged upon

====Lower register====
Detail showing the damned falling into hell
The Virgin Mary, John the Baptist, twelve Apostles and an assortment of Kings and others are positioned at either side of Michael. The figures are mostly unidentified but seem to include a king, pope, monk and three women. The dead rise from their graves in the ground around Michael's feet. Some are walk towards heaven, others towards hell. Heaven is represented by a gate leading to a cathedral illuminated with shining light. The saved walk calmly towards the cathedral clasping their hands in prayer, as an angel stands by the gate. The idea that the church was an earthly representation of heaven, and even the gate to heaven, was popularised in the 13th century by theologians such as Durandus, Jacobs (1991), 47 and the church as gate to heaven here bears a resemblance the entrances at the hospice. Blum (1969), 46 The way to heaven is shown clearly in the gilded church – the saved must walk up a set of steps, turn left, and then disappear from sight. Jacobs (2011), 115 

Hell is depicted as a place of fiery gloom into which the damned tumble screaming and crying. The souls held in the scales are naked, with the blessed looking upwards towards Christ, the banished looking downwards. They are tilted in the same direction as Christ's hands, with the one raised and one lowered, separating the condemned from the saved. Technical analysis shows that the scales were at first tilted in the opposite direction. Reinforcing this, inscriptions around the groupings read either VIRTUTES (Virtues) and PECCATA (sins). The dead risen from their graves are tiny in scale compared to Christ and the saints. Unusually for Last Judgement paintings until van der Weyden, the damned are not tormented by beasts and monsters. They scurry to their fate, with heads mostly bowed, but seem troubled only by the anguish of their situation. According to Lane the lost descend into hell as those whose "only demons are the torments of the mind". Lane (1982), 172 Unlike heaven which is fully enclosed in a single panel, hell extends into the adjoining panel representing the concept that hell is open and spews pollution outwards into the world. Jacobs (1991), 100 

Lorne Campbell notes that the inner panels evidence a very pessimistic view of humanity, with the damned far outnumbering the saved, Campbell (2004), 81 especially compared to Stefan Lochner's Cologne panel, where the saved crowd the entrance to heaven. Here only a few "timid souls" enter the gates of heaven. The transformation the resurrected undergo is visible as they move from panel to panel. As they rise at Michael's feet the faces show little expression, but as the damned move inextricably towards hell, their horror and desperation is visible. On Michael's left side, the saved "have the same beatific expressions", according to Jacobs, but in their postures they shift from facing Christ and Michael towards the entry to heaven. This is emphasized by the couple, standing below Mary, with the man shifting the woman's position away from Michael and towards the entry to heaven. Jacobs (1991), 98-99 A second couple, on the opposite panel, face hell. The woman is hunched down, positioned towards hell, but the man still looks up towards Christ. Jacobs (2011), 114 

File:Rogier van der Weyden - The Last Judgment (detail) - WGA25628.jpg|Entrance to heaven
File:Rogier van der Weyden - The Last Judgment (detail) - WGA25633.jpg|The dead rise from their graves
File:Rogier van der Weyden - The Last Judgment (detail) - WGA25647.jpg|The damned make their way to hell

===Exterior panels===
The exterior panels contain two donor wings, a pair of saints, and two with Gabriel presenting to Mary. The donors are on the outer wings, kneeling in front of prayer books. Four imitation statues in grisaille make up the inner panels. The lower two depict saints Sebastian and Anthony, the two healing saints, particularly appropriate to a hospital setting. Sebastian was the saint of plagues and an intercessory against epidemics; Anthony the patron saint of skin diseases and associated with St Anthony's Fire, identified in modern times as ergotism. Lane (1989), 170-171 The two small upper register panels show a rather traditional Annunciation scene, with the usual dove near Mary. These sets of panels, unlike those on the interior, are each sharply divided from the other. The figures in each panel occupy a distinctly separate niche, and the colour scheme contrasts sharply between grisaille saints and donors. 

Like many mid-1400s polyptychs, the exterior panels borrow heavily from Jan van Eyck's Ghent Altarpiece, which was completed in 1432. The combination of naturalistic donor portraits with grisaille imitation statues of saints, is present in the Ghent Altarpiece as is the treatment of the Annunciation. However van der Weyden was not inclined to merely imitate and develops the format in the way he arranges the panels and figures in a concentrated and compact format. Campbell (2004), 21 Jacobs writes of van der Weyden's version that "the exterior presents the most consistent pictorial rendering of trompe l'oeil sculpture to date". Gabriel's scroll and Mary's lily appear to be made of stone; the figures cast shadows against the back of their niches, causing a sense of depth, adding to the illusion. 

Rolin and de Salins can be identified by the coats-of-arms held by the angels. Van Eyck had earlier portrayed Rolin in his Madonna of Chancellor Rolin, and he is recognisable from that work; both portraits show similar lips, a large chin and somewhat pointed ears. In van Eyck's portrait, Rolin is presented as perhaps pompous and arrogant; here – ten years later – he appears more thoughtful and concerned with humility, at a time when court politics caused his fall from power. Vaughan (2012), 340 Rolin is shown in profile in both; Campbell wryly notes that van der Weyden may have been able to disguise the sitter's ugliness and age, especially the shape of his mouth may have been downplayed. He writes while "van Eyck impassively recorded; van der Weyden imposed a stylised and highly personal vision of the subject". Van Eyck's depiction was likely the more accurate; van der Weyden embellished, mainly by lengthening the nose, enlarging the eyes and raising his eyebrows. Campbell (2004), 22 

==Inscriptions==
The panels contain several inscriptions of biblical texts. They are applied in two ways, either as lettering seemingly sewn into the edges of the figures' clothes (which are mostly illegible because of the folds), or painted directly onto the surface of the central inner panel. Acres (2000), 86–7 The latter occur in four instances, with two pairs of text that appears to float on either side of Christ, and two around Michael. Beneath the lily, Latin lettering records the words of God the Father: VENITE BENDICTI PATRIS MEI POSSIDETE PATATUM VOBIS REGUM A CONSTUTIONE MUNDI ("Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world"). The text beneath the sword reads: DISCEDITE A ME MALEDICITI IN IGEM AERTERNUM QUO PARATUS EST DIABLO ET ANGELIS EIUS ("Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels"). Both inscriptions quote from Jesus' discourse on The Sheep and the Goats (Matthew 25). 

The inscriptions obey the 14th-century convention of showing figures, imagery and motifs associated with the saved to Christ's right, and those of the banished to his left. The words beneath the lily (the benedicti) begin at the foot of the inscription and read upwards toward heaven, with their curves leaning in towards Christ. The text to his left (the maledicti) flows in the opposite direction, from the highest point downwards. The inscriptions to his right for the saved are in light colouring (to an extent that they are usually difficult to discern in reproduction), while the downwards words are applied with black paint. Acres (2000), 87 

==Condition==

The altarpiece underwent a major restoration between 1875–78. In recent years the wing panels were cut laterally in two so that either side could be displayed simultaneously. A number of the panels are in poor condition, owing to darkening of the colours over the centuries, accumulated dirt and poor decisions during restoration. At some point clothes were painted over the nude figures of the souls. These additions were removed during the 1870s restoration, but not without significant damage to the original paintwork. In general, the central inner panels are better preserved than the inner wings and outer panels. Campbell (2004), 77 De Salins' panel is in poor condition. Its colours have darkened with age; originally the niche was a light blue, today it is light green. The cloth draped behind her was scarlet rather than gold, and the shield held by the angel was at first blue. 

==Sources and influences==
Stefan Lochner, Last Judgment, c. 1435. Wallraf-Richartz Museum, Cologne
Van der Weyden may have drawn influence from Stefan Lochner's c. 1435 Last Judgment, and a similar c. 1420 painting now in the Hotel de Ville, Diest, Belgium. Points of reference may include Christ raised over a Great Deësis of saints, apostles and clergy, above depictions of the entrance to heaven and the gates of hell. In both earlier works Christ perches on a rainbow; in the Deësis panel he also is above a globe. While these two panels are filled with dread and chaos, van der Weyden's panels display the same sorrowful, but self-controlled dignity of his best works. This is most evident in the manner in which the oversized and dispassionate Christ orchestrates the scene from heaven. He towers over the other figures to such an extent that he extends across two registers of panels, with the saints mostly on wing panels. Lane (1981), 171 

The similarities between van der Weyden's Last Judgement and Hans Memling's c. late 1460s Last Judgement (which was lost at sea and stolen by pirates) are so striking that art historians suggest Florentine banker Angelo Tani first approached van der Weyden to paint the piece which he eventually commissioned from Memling. On the interior panels, the points of similarity include Christ's placement above St Michael with his scales and the Deësis; on the exterior shutters Memling places the donors in similar positions as van der Weyden's Last Judgment. Lane (1991), 627 Yet, the Beaune altarpiece was installed about nine years earlier than Memling entered his apprenticeship with van der Weyden, leading art historians to speculate that Tani or Memling saw the piece in situ at Beaune, or that a workshop pattern existed which came into Memling's possession. Lane (1991), 629 The existence of two additional works showing a depiction of the Christ figure similar to van der Weyden's, a Martin Schongauer at the Louvre dated c. 1469 and another in Germany from about 1493, bear out the theory of the existence of workshop patterns or drawings. Lane (1991), 628 Despite the marked similarities, Memling's Last Judgment diverges from van der Weyden's, as Lane writes, with Memling's more crowded painting in sharp contrast to "the hushed serenity of Rogier's composition." 

==References==

===Notes===

===Sources===

* Acres, Alfred. "Rogier van der Weyden's Painted Texts". Artibus et Historiae, Volume 21, No. 41, 2000
* Blum, Shirley Neilsen. Early Netherlandish Triptychs: A Study in Patronage. California Studies in the History of Art, 1969. ISBN 0-520-01444-2 
* Campbell, Lorne. Van der Weyden. London: Chaucer Press, 2004. ISBN 1-904449-24-7
* Harbison, Craig. "Realism and Symbolism in Early Flemish Painting". The Art Bulletin, Vol. 66, No. 4, (December 1984)
* Hayum, Andrée. "The Meaning and Function of the Isenheim Altarpiece: The Hospital Context Revisited". Art Bulletin. Vol. 59, No. 4, (December 1977)
* Jacobs, Lynn. Opening Doors: The Early Netherlandish Triptych Reinterpreted. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2011. ISBN 0-271-04840-9
* Jacobs, Lynn. "The Inverted "T"-Shape in Early Netherlandish Altarpieces: Studies in the Relation between Painting and Sculpture". Zeitschrift für Kunstgeschichte, Vol 54. No. 1, 1991
* Lane, Barbara. "'Requiem aeternam dona eis': The Beaune Last Judgment and the Mass of the Dead". Simiolus: Netherlands Quarterly for the History of Art, Volume 19, No. 3, 1989
* Lane, Barbara. "The Patron and the Pirate: The Mystery of Memling's Gdańsk Last Judgment". The Art Bulletin, Vol. 73, No. 4, 1991
* McNamee, Maurice. Vested Angels: Eucharistic Allusions in Early Netherlandish paintings. Leuven: Peeters Publishers, 1998. ISBN 9-0429-0007-5
* Sinclair, Keith. Declaration De Hystoires. Leiden: Brill, 1990. ISBN 9-0040-9088-6 
* Smith, Jeffrey Chipps. The Northern Renaissance. Phaidon Press, 2004. ISBN 0-7148-3867-5
* Smith, Molly Teasdale. "On the Donor of Jan van Eyck's Rolin Madonna". Gesta, Volume 20, No. 1, 1981
* Upton, Joel Morgan. Petrus Christus: his place in Fifteenth-Century Flemish painting. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1989. ISBN 0-2710-0672-2
* Vaughan, Richard. Philip the Good. Boydell and Brewer, 2012 edition. ISBN 978-0-85115-917-1

==External links==
*


