[[Ramadan]]

Ramadan ( , ; ; ; ; Indonesian: Puasa) is the ninth month of the Islamic calendar; BBC - Religions Retrieved 2012-07-25 Muslims worldwide observe this as a month of fasting. This annual observance is regarded as one of the Five Pillars of Islam. The month lasts 29–30 days based on the visual sightings of the crescent moon, according to numerous biographical accounts compiled in the hadiths. The word Ramadan comes from the Arabic root ramiḍa or ar-ramaḍ, which means scorching heat or dryness. Fasting is fard ("obligatory") for adult Muslims, except those who are ill, traveling, pregnant, breastfeeding, diabetic or going through menstrual bleeding. Fasting (Al Siyam) - - Page 18, el Bahay el Kholi, 1998 Fasting the month of Ramadan was made obligatory (wājib) during the month of Sha'aban, in the second year after the Muslims migrated from Mecca to Medina.

While fasting from dawn until sunset, Muslims refrain from consuming food, drinking liquids, smoking, and engaging in sexual relations; in some interpretations they also refrain from swearing. Food and drink is served daily, before sunrise and after sunset. Islam, Andrew Egan - 2002 - page 24 Dubai - Page 189, Andrea Schulte-Peevers - 2010 According to Islam, the thawab (rewards) of fasting are many, but in this month they are believed to be multiplied. Fasting for Muslims during Ramadan typically includes the increased offering of salat (prayers) and recitation of the Quran. 

==In the Quran==
Chapter 2, Revelation 185 of the Quran states:
The month of Ramadan is that in which was revealed the Quran; a guidance for mankind, and clear proofs of the guidance, and the criterion (of right and wrong). And whosoever of you is present, let him fast the month, and whosoever of you is sick or on a journey, a number of other days. Allah desires for you ease; He desires not hardship for you; and that you should complete the period, and that you should magnify Allah for having guided you, and that perhaps you may be thankful.

Thus, according to the Quran, Muhammad first received revelations in the lunar month of Ramadan. Therefore, the month of Ramadan is considered to be the most sacred month of the Islamic calendar, the recording of which began with the Hijra.

==Origins==

Ramadan, as a month name, is of Muslim origin. However, prior to Islam's exclusion of intercalary days from its calendar, the name of this month was Nātiq and, due to the intercalary days added, always occurred in the warm season. Quran, Short Commentary 

It is believed that the first revelation to Muhammad was sent down during the month of Ramadan. Quran Chapter 2, Revelation 185 Furthermore, God proclaimed to Muhammad that fasting for His sake was not a new innovation in monotheism, but rather an obligation practiced by those truly devoted to the oneness of God. Quran Chapter 2, Revelation 183 

During the Jahiliyyah (i.e. pre-Islamic period), the Quraysh tribe and the Jews used to fast on the day of Ashura. It marks two important events: the day Noah left the Ark and the day that Moses was saved from the Egyptians by God. http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/islam/holydays/ashura.shtml Ashura may or may not be referring to the Jewish practice of fasting on Yom Kippur. Sunan al-Tirmidhi I.145. Probably Tisha B'Av (9th of Av) which is a fast day traditionally proclaimed as the day the Messiah will be born. 

Abu Zanad, an Arabic writer from Iraq who lived after the founding of Islam around 747 CE, wrote that at least one Mandaean community located in al-Jazira (modern northern Iraq) observed Ramadan. Abdel Allah ibn Zakwan Abi al-Zanad. See Ibn Qutaybah,op.cit.page 204; Cited by Sinasi Gunduz, The Knowledge of Life, Oxford University, 1994, page 25 

Historically, Ramadan comes "from the strict Lenten discipline of the Syrian churches." Jenkins, Philip (2006-07-31). The New Faces of Christianity: Believing the Bible in the Global South (p. 182). Oxford University Press. Kindle Edition. 

==Important dates==
The beginning and end of Ramadan are determined by the lunar Islamic calendar.

===Beginning===
Click to view larger image
Hilāl (the crescent) is typically a day (or more) after the astronomical new moon. Since the new moon marks the beginning of the new month, Muslims can usually safely estimate the beginning of Ramadan. Hilal Sighting & Islamic Dates: Issues and Solution Insha'Allaah. Hilal Sighting Committee of North America (website). Retrieved 19 August 2009. However, to many Muslims, this is not in accordance with authenticated Hadiths stating that visual confirmation per region is recommended. The consistent variations of a day have existed since the time of Muhammad. 

===Night of Power===

Laylat al-Qadr, which in Arabic means "the night of power" or "the night of decree," is considered the most holy night of the year. This is the night in which Muslims believe the first revelation of the Quran was sent down to Muhammad stating that this night was "better than one thousand months proper worship, as stated in Chapter 97:3 of the Qu'ran.

Also, generally, Laylat al-Qadr is believed to have occurred on an odd-numbered night during the last 10 days of Ramadan, i.e., the night of the 21st, 23rd, 25th, 27th or 29th. The Dawoodi Bohra Community believe that 23rd night is laylat al Qadr. 
 

===End===

The holiday of Eid al-Fitr الفطر),(Bengali: ঈদুল ফিত্‌র), "festivity of breaking the fast" marks the end of Ramadan and the beginning of the next lunar month, Shawwal. This first day of the following month is declared after another crescent new moon has been sighted or the completion of 30 days of fasting if no visual sighting is possible due to weather conditions. This first day of Shawwal is called Eid al-Fitr. Eid al-Fitr may also be a reference towards the festive nature of having endured the month of fasting successfully and returning to the more natural disposition (fitra) of being able to eat, drink and resume intimacy with spouses during the day.

==Religious practices==
Azim Azimzade. Ramadan of the poor people. 1938
The predominant practice in Ramadan is fasting from dawn to sunset. The pre-dawn meal before the fast is called the suhoor, while the meal at sunset that breaks the fast is the iftar. Considering the high diversity of the global Muslim population, it is impossible to describe typical suhoor or iftar meals.

Muslims also engage in increased prayer and charity during Ramadan.

===Fasting===

Ramadan is a time of spiritual reflection, improvement and increased devotion and worship. Muslims are expected to put more effort into following the teachings of Islam. The fast (sawm) begins at dawn and ends at sunset. In addition to abstaining from eating and drinking, Muslims also increase restraint, such as abstaining from sexual relations and generally sinful speech and behavior. The act of fasting is said to redirect the heart away from worldly activities, its purpose being to cleanse the soul by freeing it from harmful impurities. Ramadan also teaches Muslims how to better practice self-discipline, self-control, Why Ramadan brings us together; BBC, 01 September 2008 sacrifice, and empathy for those who are less fortunate; thus encouraging actions of generosity and compulsory charity (zakat). Help for the Heavy at Ramadan, Washington Post, 27 September 2008 

It becomes compulsory for Muslims to start fasting when they reach puberty, so long as they are healthy and sane, and have no disabilities or illnesses. Many children endeavour to complete as many fasts as possible as practice for later life.

Exemptions to fasting are travel, menstruation, severe illness, pregnancy, and breast-feeding. However, many Muslims with medical conditions insist on fasting to satisfy their spiritual needs, although it is not recommended by the hadith. Professionals should closely monitor individuals who decide to persist with fasting. Those who were unable to fast still must make up the days missed later. 

====Suhoor====

Iftar at Sultan Ahmed Mosque in Istanbul, Turkey.
Each day before dawn, many Muslims observe a pre-fast meal called suhoor. After stopping a short time before dawn, Muslims begin the first prayer of the day, Fajr. At sunset, families hasten for the fast-breaking meal known as iftar.

====Iftar====

In the evening, dates are usually the first food to break the fast; according to tradition, Muhammad broke fast with three dates. Following that, Muslims generally adjourn for the Maghrib prayer, the fourth of the five daily prayers, after which the main meal is served. 

Social gatherings, many times in a buffet style, at iftar are frequent, and traditional dishes are often highlighted, including traditional desserts, especially those made only during Ramadan. Water is usually the beverage of choice, but juice and milk are also consumed. Soft drinks and caffeinated beverages are consumed to a lesser extent. 

In the Middle East, the iftar meal consists of water, juices, dates, salads and appetizers, one or more main dishes, and various kinds of desserts. Usually, the dessert is the most important part during iftar. Typical main dishes are lamb stewed with wheat berries, lamb kebabs with grilled vegetables, or roast chicken served with chickpea-studded rice pilaf. A rich dessert such as luqaimat, baklava or kunafeh (a buttery, syrup-sweetened kadaifi noodle pastry filled with cheese) concludes the meal. 

Over time, iftar has grown into banquet festivals. This is a time of fellowship with families, friends and surrounding communities, but may also occupy larger spaces at masjid or banquet halls for 100 or more diners. 

===Charity===

Men praying during Ramadan at the Shrine of Hazrat Ali or "Blue Mosque" in Mazar-i-Sharif, Afghanistan.
Charity is very important in Islam, and even more so during Ramadan. Zakāt, often translated as "the poor-rate," is obligatory as one of the pillars of Islam; a fixed percentage of the person's savings is required to be given to the poor. Sadaqah is voluntary charity in giving above and beyond what is required from the obligation of zakāt. In Islam all good deeds are more handsomely rewarded in Ramadan than in any other month of the year. Consequently, many will choose this time to give a larger portion, if not all, of the zakāt which they are obligated to give. In addition, many will also use this time to give a larger portion of sadaqah in order to maximize the reward that will await them at the Last Judgment.

In many Muslim countries, it is a common sight to see people giving more food to the poor and the homeless, and even to see large public areas for the poor to come and break their fast. It is said that if a person helps a fasting person to break their fast, then they receive a reward for that fast, without diminishing the reward that the fasting person got for their fast.

===Nightly prayers===

===Recitation of the Quran===
In addition to fasting, Muslims are encouraged to read the entire Quran. Some Muslims perform the recitation of the entire Quran by means of special prayers, called Tarawih. These voluntary prayers are held in the mosques every night of the month, during which a whole section of the Quran (juz', which is 1/30 of the Quran) is recited. Therefore, the entire Quran would be completed at the end of the month. Although it is not required to read the whole Quran in the Tarawih prayers, it is common.

==Cultural practices==
Fanous Ramadan decorations in Cairo, Egypt
Ramadan in the Old City of Jerusalem

In some Muslim countries today lights are strung up in public squares, and across city streets, to add to the festivities of the month. Lanterns have become symbolic decorations welcoming the month of Ramadan. In a growing number of countries, they are hung on city streets. The tradition of lanterns as a decoration becoming associated with Ramadan is believed to have originated during the Fatimid Caliphate primarily centered in Egypt, where Caliph al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah was greeted by people holding lanterns to celebrate his ruling. From that time lanterns were used to light mosques and houses throughout the capital city of Cairo. Shopping malls, places of business, and people's homes can be seen with stars and crescents and various lighting effects, as well.

== In law ==
In some Muslim countries, failing to fast or the open flouting of such behavior during Ramadan is considered a crime and is prosecuted as such. For instance, in Algeria, in October 2008 the court of Biskra condemned six people to four years in prison and heavy fines. AFP-Arabia.net, 7 October 2008; visited 9 December 2008. 

In Kuwait, according to law number 44 of 1968 the penalty is a fine of no more than 100 Kuwaiti dinars, or jail for no more than one month, or both penalties, for those seen eating, drinking or smoking during Ramadan daytime. Press release by Kuwait Ministry Of Interior 
 
In the U.A.E., eating or drinking during the daytime of Ramadan is considered a minor offence and would be punished by up to 240 hours of community service. 
 

In Egypt, alcohol sales are banned during Ramadan. "Egypt's tourism minister 'confirms' alcohol prohibition on Islamic holidays beyond Ramadan," Al-Ahram, July 22, 2012. 

Some countries have laws that amend work schedules in Ramadan. Under U.A.E. labor law, the maximum working hours are to be 6 hours per day and 36 hours per week. Qatar, Oman, Bahrain and Kuwait have similar laws. Employment Issues During Ramadan – The Gulf Region, DLA Piper Middle East. 

==Health concerns==
Ramadan alters the circadian rhythm and the necessary water supply for humans. Mideast summer heat adds hardship to Ramadan fast Some harassed libertarians say you should be free not to observe Ramadan Ramadan in Morocco: To fast or not to fast An updated review of the literature by an Iranian group suggested fasting during Ramadan might be injurious for patients with moderate or worse kidney disease, but was not injurious to renal transplant patients with good function or most stone forming patients. Emami-Naini A, Roomizadeh P, Baradaran A, Abedini A, Abtahi M. J Res Med Sci. 2013 Aug;18(8):711-716. Review. PMID: 24379850 

==See also==
* Fasting

==Notes==

: In Arabic phonology, it can be , depending on the region.

==References==

==External links==

* Ramadan Dates Till 2022
* Ramadan Articles & Resources
* Tarawih: Sunnah or Bid'ah
* RAMADAN KAREEM and Blessing of Ramadan
* Ramadan and Fasting in Islam
* Articles on Ramadan
* Ramadan (PressTV video)
* Purpose of Fasting in Islam: "And Fast Until The Onset Of Night"


