[[Shiva]]

Shiva (; meaning "The Auspicious One"), also known as Mahadeva ("Great God"), is a popular Hindu deity. Shiva is regarded as one of the primary forms of God. He is the Supreme God within Shaivism, one of the three most influential denominations in contemporary Hinduism. Tattwananda, p. 45. 
He is one of the five primary forms of God in the Smarta tradition, Flood (1996), p. 17. and "the Destroyer" or "the Transformer" Zimmer (1972) p. 124. among the Trimurti, the Hindu Trinity of the primary aspects of the divine. 

Shiva has many benevolent and fearsome forms. Sharma, Iconography of Sadasiva At the highest level Shiva is limitless, transcendent, unchanging and formless. See Parmeshwaranand, Volume 3. See Kramrisch, The presence of Siva, page 186. See Abhayananda, page 95. See Davis, pp 113-114. Chatterji, Kashmir Shaivism. In benevolent aspects, he is depicted as an omniscient Yogi who lives an ascetic life on Mount Kailash, as well as a householder with wife Parvati and his two children, Ganesha and Kartikeya and in fierce aspects, he is often depicted slaying demons. Shiva is also regarded as the patron god of yoga and arts. See Shiva Samhita, e.g. translation by Mallinson. See Varenne, page 82. See Marchand for Jnana Yoga. 

The main iconographical attributes of Shiva are the third eye on his forehead, a snake around his neck, the crescent moon adorning, the holy river Ganga flowing from his matted hair, the trishula as his weapon and the damaru as his instrument.

Shiva is usually worshiped in the aniconic form of Lingam. Davis writes on page 122: "The Saiva worshipper does not worship the object itself as Siva or as representing Siva; he directs his worship toward it as the physical support for Siva's special presence." Hinduism: Beliefs and Practices, by Jeanne Fowler, pgs. 42–43, In traditional Indian society, the linga is rather seen as a symbol of the energy and potentiality of the god. See Fuller, The Camphor Flame, pp 58. 

== Etymology and other names ==

Shiva absorbed in meditation, as depicted commonly in Hinduism
The Sanskrit word Shiva (Devanagari: , ) comes from Shri Rudram Chamakam of Taittiriya Samhita (TS 4.5, 4.7) of Krishna Yajurveda. The root word http://sanskritdictionary.com/?q=%C5%9Bi&lang=&iencoding=&action=Search means auspicious. In simple English transliteration it is written either as Shiva or Siva. The adjective , is used as an attributive epithet not particularly of Rudra, but of several other Vedic deities. For use of the term as an epithet for other Vedic deities, see: Chakravarti, p. 28. 

The other popular names associated with Shiva are Mahadev, Mahesh, Maheshwar, Shankar, Shambhu, Rudra, Har, Trilochan, Devendra (meaning Chief of the gods) and Trilokinath (meaning Lord of the three realms). See translation by Manmatha Nath Dutt, Chapter 17 of Volume 13. See translation by Kisari Mohan Ganguli, Chapter 17 of Volume 13. See Chidbhavananda, "Siva Sahasranama Stotram". 

The Sanskrit word means "relating to the God Shiva", and this term is the Sanskrit name both for one of the principal sects of Hinduism and for a member of that sect. Apte, p. 927 It is used as an adjective to characterize certain beliefs and practices, such as Shaivism. For the definition "Śaivism refers to the traditions which follow the teachings of () and which focus on the deity ... " see: Flood (1996), p. 149. He is the oldest worshipped Lord of India.

The Tamil word Sivan, Tamil: ("Fair Skinned") could have been derived from the word sivappu. The word 'sivappu' means "red" in Tamil language but while addressing a person's skin texture in Tamil the word 'Sivappu' is used for being Fair Skinned. Tantra: The Cult of the Feminine, p. 213. Shaivism in Ancient India: From the Earliest Times to C.A.D. 300 (1982) 

Adi Sankara, in his interpretation of the name Shiva, the 27th and 600th name of Vishnu sahasranama, the thousand names of Vishnu interprets Shiva to have multiple meanings: "The Pure One", or "the One who is not affected by three Gunas of Prakrti (Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas)" or "the One who purifies everyone by the very utterance of His name." Sri Vishnu Sahasranama, Ramakrishna Math edition, pg.47 and pg. 122. Swami Chinmayananda, in his translation of Vishnu sahasranama, further elaborates on that verse: Shiva means "the One who is eternally pure" or "the One who can never have any contamination of the imperfection of Rajas and Tamas". Swami Chinmayananda's translation of Vishnu sahasranama, pg. 24, Central Chinmaya Mission Trust. 

Shiva's role as the primary deity of Shaivism is reflected in his epithets ("Great God"; "Great" and deva "god"), Kramrisch, p. 476. For appearance of the name in the Shiva Sahasranama see: ("Great Lord"; "great" and "lord"), Kramrisch, p. 477. For appearance of the name in the Shiva Sahasranama see: and (God)|] ("Supreme Lord"). For as "Supreme Lord" see: Kramrisch, p. 479. 

There are at least eight different versions of the Shiva Sahasranama, devotional hymns (stotras) listing many names of Shiva. The version appearing in Book 13 () of the Mahabharata is considered the kernel of this tradition. This is the source for the version presented in Chidbhavananda, who refers to it being from the Mahabharata but does not explicitly clairify which of the two Mahabharata versions he is using. See Chidbhavananda, p.5. Shiva also has Dasha-Sahasranamas (10,000 names) that are found in the Mahanyasa. The Shri Rudram Chamakam, also known as the Śatarudriya, is a devotional hymn to Shiva hailing him by many names. For an overview of the Śatarudriya see: Kramrisch, pp. 71-74. For complete Sanskrit text, translations, and commentary see: Sivaramamurti (1976). 

== Historical development and literature ==

The worship of Shiva is a pan-Hindu tradition, practiced widely across all of India, Nepal and Sri Lanka. Keay, p.xxvii. 

===Assimilation of traditions===

The figure of Shiva as we know him today was built up over time, with the ideas of many regional sects being amalgamated into a single figure. How the persona of Shiva converged as a composite deity is not well documented. For Shiva as a composite deity whose history is not well documented, see: Keay, p. 147. According to Vijay Nath: 

Axel Michaels the Indologist suggests that Shaivism, like Vaishnavism, implies a unity which cannot be clearly found either in religious practice or in philosophical and esoteric doctrine. Furthermore, practice and doctrine must be kept separate. Michaels, p. 215. 

An example of assimilation took place in Maharashtra, where a regional deity named Khandoba is a patron deity of farming and herding castes. Courtright, p. 205. The foremost center of worship of Khandoba in Maharashtra is in Jejuri. For Jejuri as the foremost center of worship see: Mate, p. 162. Khandoba has been assimilated as a form of Shiva himself, 'Khandoba: Ursprung, Geschiche und Umvelt von Pastoralem Gotheiten in Maharashtra, Wiesbaden 1976 (German with English Synopsis) pp. 180-98, "Khandoba is a local deity in Maharashtra and been Sanskritised as an incarnation of Shiva." in which case he is worshipped in the form of a lingam. For worship of Khandoba in the form of a lingam and possible identification with Shiva based on that, see: Mate, p. 176. Khandoba's varied associations also include an identification with Surya and Karttikeya. For use of the name Khandoba as a name for Karttikeya in Maharashtra, see: Gupta, Preface, and p. 40. 

===Indus Valley origins===

Seal discovered during excavation of the Mohenjodaro archaeological site in the Indus Valley has drawn attention as a possible representation of a "yogi" or "proto-Shiva" figure

Many Indus valley seals show animals but one seal that has attracted attention shows a figure, either horned or wearing a horned headdress and possibly ithyphallic For a drawing of the seal see Figure 1 in: Flood (1996), p. 29. Singh, S.P., Rgvedic Base of the Pasupati Seal of Mohenjo-Daro(Approx 2500-3000 BC), Puratattva 19: 19-26. 1989 Kenoyer, Jonathan Mark. Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization. Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1998. figure seated in a posture reminiscent of the Lotus position and surrounded by animals was named by early excavators of Mohenjo-daroPashupati (lord of cattle), an epithet of the later Hindu gods Shiva and Rudra. Sir John Marshall and others have claimed that this figure is a prototype of Shiva and have described the figure as having three faces seated in a "yoga posture" with the knees out and feet joined.

This claim has been criticised, with some academics like Gavin Flood and John Keay characterizing them as unfounded. Keay, p. 14. Writing in 1997 Doris Srinivasan said that "Not too many recent studies continue to call the seal's figure a 'Proto-Siva'", rejecting thereby Marshall's package of proto-Siva features, including that of three heads. She interprets what John Marshall interpreted as facial as not human but more bovine, possibly a divine buffalo-man. According to Iravatham Mahadevan symbols 47 and 48 of his Indus script glossary The Indus Script: Texts, Concordance and Tables (1977), representing seated human-like figures, could describe Hindu deity Murugan, popularly known as Shiva and Parvati's son. 

===Indo-European origins===
Shiva's rise to a major position in the pantheon was facilitated by his identification with a host of Vedic deities, including Purusha, Rudra, Agni, Indra,