[[The Undertaker]]

Mark William Calaway (born March 24, 1965), better known by his ring name The Undertaker, is an American semi-retired professional wrestler. He is currently employed by the promotion WWE, where he has performed since 1990, making him one of the company's longest tenured employees.

Calaway began his wrestling career with World Class Championship Wrestling (WCCW) in 1984. After wrestling for World Championship Wrestling (WCW) as "Mean" Mark Callous from 1989–1990, he signed with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now WWE) in 1990. As The Undertaker, his gimmick is that of a macabre entity who employs scare tactics and has links to the supernatural. He is the storyline half-brother of fellow WWE wrestler Kane, with whom he has alternately feuded and teamed with as The Brothers of Destruction. Since unseating Hulk Hogan as WWF Champion in 1991, The Undertaker has been involved in various pivotal storylines and matches within WWE history. 

The Undertaker holds a record 21 consecutive victories at WWE's annual WrestleMania pay-per-view (including main event bouts at WrestleMania 13, WrestleMania XXIV and WrestleMania XXVI), sustaining his first loss at WrestleMania XXX to Brock Lesnar. Calaway is a four-time WWF/WWE Champion, three-time World Heavyweight Champion and one-time USWA Unified World Heavyweight Champion, as well as a six-time WWF/WWE World Tag Team Champion, one-time WCW World Tag Team Champion, one-time WWF Hardcore Champion and one-time WCWA Texas Heavyweight Champion.

==Early life==
Calaway is the son of Catherine and Frank Calaway (died on July 22, 2003) and has four older brothers: David, Michael, Paul, and Timothy. His parents are of Irish and Native American descent. Calaway graduated from Waltrip High School in 1983, where he was a member of the basketball team. He also played college basketball at Texas Wesleyan University during the 19851986 season. 

==Professional wrestling career==

===Early career (1984–1989)===
Calaway made his debut in 1984 for World Class Championship Wrestling under the ring name Texas Red. He wrestled and lost his first match against Bruiser Brody. In 1988, after four years in the promotion, he left and joined the Continental Wrestling Association (which became part of the United States Wrestling Association after Jerry Jarrett bought World Class Championship Wrestling and merged the two organizations into one), wrestling under several gimmicks.

On February 2, 1989, managed by Dutch Mantell, he debuted as The Master of Pain, a character fresh out of the Atlanta State Penitentiary after serving five years (much in solitary confinement) for killing two men in a fight. "1/34 Undertaker Rookie Year In Wrestling 1989 Timeline" (The Master of Pain's debut), CWA TV via YouTube After his second match the next week, he stayed in the ring, challenging USWA Unified World Heavyweight Champion Jerry Lawler to an impromptu match. The Master of Pain easily dominated Lawler until Mantell entered the ring and called him off, saying they'd done what they'd wanted. Lawler agreed to a title match, and on April 1, The Master of Pain won the title. He held it for just over three weeks before Lawler became the first man to pin him, winning it back.

While performing as The Punisher, Calaway won the WCWA Texas Heavyweight Championship on October 5, 1989, when Eric Embry forfeited the title. 

===World Championship Wrestling (1989–1990)===
In 1989, Calaway joined World Championship Wrestling as a villain and adopted the ring name Mean Mark Callous, a name devised for him by Terry Funk. He was portrayed as a morbid character; he wore predominantly black ring attire, and was described by announcer Jim Ross as having a fondness for pet snakes, and the music of Ozzy Osbourne. WCW/NWA Capital Combat (VHS). Turner Home Entertainment. 1990. Callous was promptly drafted into the Skyscrapers tag team to replace an injured Sid Vicious. The new team gained some notoriety at of the Champions#Clash of the Champions X: Texas Shootout|Clash Of The Champions X] when they beat down The Road Warriors after their match. However Callous' partner Dan Spivey left WCW days before their Chicago Street Fight against the Warriors at WrestleWar 1990. Callous and a replacement masked Skyscraper went down to defeat in the Street Fight and the team broke up soon afterwards. As he went into singles competition, Callous took on the guidance of Paul E. Dangerously and defeated Johnny Ace at Capital Combat and defeated Brian Pillman at the Clash of the Champions. In July 1990, he wrestled against Lex Luger for the NWA United States Heavyweight Championship at The Great American Bash, but was pinned by Luger. WCW declined to renew Calaway's contract.

During his time in WCW, Calaway briefly wrestled in New Japan Pro Wrestling as Punisher Dice Morgan. After leaving WCW, he briefly returned to the USWA to participate in a tournament to determine the new USWA Unified World Heavyweight Champion; he defeated Bill Dundee in the first round, but lost to Jerry Lawler in the quarterfinals. In October 1990, he signed with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF).

===World Wrestling Federation/Entertainment/WWE (1990–present)===

====Debut and various feuds (1990–1994)====
Sometime in 1990, Calaway was cast as a bounty hunter in the movie Suburban Commando, alongside WWF Champion Hulk Hogan. Hogan had seen Calaway wrestling for WCW and offered to bring him over to the WWF. Having just left WCW, Calaway accepted. Hogan introduced Calaway to Vince McMahon, who gave him the Undertaker gimmick, based on a mortician from old Western movies. 

Calaway made his WWF debut as Kane the Undertaker at a taping of WWF Superstars on November 19, 1990. His original version of the Deadman depicted him in a trench coat, gray-striped tie, and gray-ringed, black stetson hat with gray gloves and boot spats. He was portrayed as impervious to pain, something accomplished by Calaway not selling his opponents' attacks. Calaway made his official on-camera debut on November 22 at Survivor Series as a heel when he was the mystery partner of Ted DiBiase's Million Dollar team. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards", p. 88–89. Approximately one minute into the match, the Undertaker eliminated Koko B. Ware with his finisher, the Tombstone Piledriver. He also eliminated Dusty Rhodes before being counted out. During the match, Calloway was referred to as the Undertaker, neglecting the Kane name, which was dropped shortly after the event. At the same time, the Undertaker switched managers from Brother Love to Paul Bearer — a histrionic, ghostly character, almost always seen bearing an urn, which he used to revive the Undertaker's strength whenever Undertaker fell victim to his antagonists. During his heel run, Undertaker would place his defeated opponents (almost always jobbers) in a bodybag and carry them to the back. 

He made his WrestleMania debut at WrestleMania VII, quickly defeating "Superfly" Jimmy Snuka. He began his first major feud with the Ultimate Warrior, when he attacked the Warrior and locked him in an airtight casket on the set of his manager, Paul Bearer's Funeral Parlor interview segment. After a year of battles with the Warrior, Randy Savage, Sid Justice, Sgt. Slaughter, and Hulk Hogan, he defeated Hogan to win his first WWF Championship at Survivor Series with the help of Ric Flair, and thus became the youngest WWF Champion in history until having this record broken by Yokozuna in April 1993 at WrestleMania IX. PWI Staff. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards", p. 89–90. WWF President Jack Tunney ordered a rematch for This Tuesday in Texas six days later, where the Undertaker lost the title back to Hogan. 

In February 1992, the Undertaker's ally Jake "The Snake" Roberts tried to attack Randy Savage's manager/wife Miss Elizabeth with a steel chair when the Undertaker stopped him, becoming a fan favorite for the first time. The face turn was solidified on a subsequent episode of WWF Superstars of Wrestling, where Roberts confronted the Undertaker on the "Funeral Parlor" set over that incident (aired on Saturday Night's Main Event). After demanding to know whose side the Undertaker was on and getting the reply "Not yours!", Roberts attacked both Bearer and the Undertaker, only for the Undertaker to stand his ground and run Roberts off. The Undertaker defeated Roberts at WrestleMania VIII. He then feuded extensively with wrestlers managed by Harvey Wippleman throughout 1992 and 1993, such as Kamala, Giant González and Yokozuna. Also in this time he headlined the first episode of Monday Night Raw on January 11, 1993 with a victory over Damien Demento. He faced González at WrestleMania IX, which is notable as Undertaker's only disqualification win at WrestleMania after the use of chloroform. His rivalry with Yokozuna culminated in a WWF Championship casket match at the 1994 Royal Rumble. During the match, champion Yokozuna sealed the Undertaker in the casket with the assistance of several other villainous Wippleman-managed wrestlers to win the match. The Undertaker appeared from inside the casket on the video screen, representing his spirit, warning that he would return. PWI Staff. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards", p. 92–94. The Undertaker did not appear in the WWF for seven months after his loss to Yokozuna. In reality, he was given time off to allow a back injury to heal.

====Return; various storylines (1994–1997)====
Paul Bearer betrayed Undertaker by hitting him with the urn he is seen carrying here.
During his absence, the WWF promoted his return by showing video clips of people who claimed to have seen the Undertaker. After WrestleMania X, Ted DiBiase introduced an Undertaker back to the WWF. This Undertaker, however, played by Brian Lee, was an impostor Undertaker (dubbed the "Underfaker" by fans) and led to the return of the real Undertaker in the SummerSlam main event, appearing as a new version of his Deadman persona, represented now by cool colors and replacing grey with purple. The Undertaker defeated the impostor after three Tombstone Piledrivers. At Survivor Series, the Undertaker defeated Yokozuna in a rematch, another casket match. Throughout most of 1995, the Undertaker feuded with members of Ted DiBiase's Million Dollar Corporation. At WrestleMania XI, while the Undertaker was facing King Kong Bundy, Kama stole the urn, and antagonized him by melting it into a large gold necklace. Later, the Undertaker defeated Kama in a casket match at SummerSlam. Several weeks later, the Undertaker injured his orbital bone near his eye, forcing a period of absence for surgery, until his return at Survivor Series.

the Undertaker returned at the 1995 Survivor Series, wearing a Phantom of the Opera-like, grey upper-face mask. In the main event of the 1996 Royal Rumble, the Undertaker was unmasked in a WWF Championship match against Bret Hart. Diesel interfered in this match, costing the Undertaker the championship. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.95) A rematch for the title on the February 5 episode of Raw saw similar interference. At that month's Your House 6|In Your House: Rage in the Cage], while Diesel was facing Hart in a steel cage match, the Undertaker delivered a surprise attack, emerging from a hole he had ripped through the ring canvas and dragging Diesel with him down under, allowing Hart the victory. After several weeks of more tit for tat between Diesel and the Undertaker, the feud culminated in a match between the two at WrestleMania XII, to which Undertaker was victorious. 

His next feud commenced the very next night when Mankind made his debut and interfered in the Undertaker's match with Justin Hawk Bradshaw. For the next few months, Mankind ambushed and cost the Undertaker several matches. The feud intensified, and they began taking their battles into crowds, backstage areas, and in the boiler rooms of different arenas. Mankind cost the Undertaker the WWF Intercontinental Championship at , assisting champion Goldust to victory. As a result, the first ever Boiler Room Brawl was booked between the two at SummerSlam. During the match, when Undertaker reached for Paul Bearer's urn, Bearer hit him with it, betraying the Undertaker and allowing Mankind to "incapacitate" him with the Mandible claw, giving him the win. After Bearer's betrayal, the Undertaker took his rivalry with Mankind to a new level, resulting in a Buried Alive match in the main event of Your House 11: Buried Alive|In Your House: Buried Alive]. The Undertaker won the match after a chokeslam into the open grave, but after interference from The Executioner, as well as the help of several other superstars, the Undertaker was ultimately "Buried Alive." 

After being buried alive, the Undertaker returned at the Survivor Series again pitting him against Mankind, but with a unique stipulation; hanging 20 ft above the ring was Paul Bearer, enclosed in a steel cage. If Undertaker won the match, he would be able to get his hands on Bearer. Even though the Undertaker won the match, interference from The Executioner enabled Bearer to escape the Undertaker's clutches. PWI Staff. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.96–97) It was also at this event that Undertaker had developed a more humanized Deadman incarnation than before, taking on a gothic, rebelling persona (perhaps to better fit in with The Attitude Era that consisted of more adult-oriented programming content and that was budding at around the time). In this form, he proclaimed himself as "The Lord of Darkness." Following Survivor Series, the Undertaker briefly turned his attentions to The Executioner, who had been interfering in on his matches since his arrival and had months earlier helped bury the Undertaker alive at In Your House Buried Alive. At Your House 12: It's Time|In Your House: It's Time], the Undertaker defeated The Executioner in an Armageddon rules match. He then moved on to feud with Vader. They met at the 1997 Royal Rumble in a singles match, where Undertaker lost after Bearer interfered on behalf of his new protégé. The two then clashed in the Royal Rumble match itself as they made it to the final moments of the match but both were eliminated by Stone Cold Steve Austin, who had crept back into the match after his elimination was unseen. He met both Vader and Austin in a Four Corners Elimination match for the vacant WWF Championship at , but Bret Hart won. However, the following month the Undertaker managed to win the title for the second time by defeating Sycho Sid at WrestleMania 13. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.98–99) 

====Hell in a Cell and Brothers of Destruction (1997–1998)====

In May 1997, Paul Bearer attempted to rejoin the Undertaker, using the ultimatum of revealing the Undertaker's "deepest, darkest secret" to the world. In storyline, Bearer announced that the Undertaker was an arsonist/murderer, who as a child had burned down the family funeral home business (where he and his family lived and Bearer worked), killing his parents and ostensibly his younger half-brother as well. The Undertaker denied all this; however, Bearer claimed to having proof in the form of the Undertaker's alive and well half-brother Kane, who had survived though horribly scarred and burned. Bearer raised Kane after the fire, having him institutionalized from the date of the fire all the way into adulthood. Ever since the fire, Kane had been awaiting to exact vengeance on his older half-brother. In defense, Undertaker responded that Kane, a pyromaniac, had been the one to set the fire and could not have possibly even survived. Also during the period, Bearer had unintentionally admitted to Undertaker's mother having an affair with him. As a result, it was revealed to the Undertaker that Kane was actually his half-brother. Until that point, Undertaker spent his life (entirety of the father's life) under the impression that Kane was fully related to him and his family. It was during this time that the Undertaker also made an appearance in Michinoku Pro Wrestling, defeating Hakushi in a singles match. 

The Undertaker in September 1997.
Concurrent to the deep, dark secret storyline directed by Bearer, Undertaker began a new rivalry at SummerSlam when guest referee Shawn Michaels accidentally hit the Undertaker with a steel chair shot meant for Bret Hart, costing the Undertaker his WWF Championship. After a double count-out draw during , Undertaker challenged Michaels to the first Hell in a Cell match at . During this match, the Undertaker's storyline half-brother Kane finally made his debut under the control of Paul Bearer, ripping off the door to the cell and giving the Undertaker a Tombstone Piledriver, Undertaker's trademark finisher, allowing Michaels to pin him. As the storyline progressed Kane, through Bearer, challenged the Undertaker, but the Undertaker consistently refused to fight his brother. The Undertaker's final encounter with Michaels was in a casket match at the Royal Rumble. The week before, Kane had seemed to ally with his brother against Michaels' D-Generation X but at the PPV Kane trapped him in the coffin, padlocking the casket lid, and setting it ablaze which again gave Michaels the victory. The Undertaker, however, had disappeared when the casket lid was reopened. PWI Staff. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.100–101) After a two month hiatus, the Undertaker returned and defeated Kane at WrestleMania XIV. The two had a rematch, the first ever Inferno match, one month later at , which the Undertaker won by setting Kane's right arm on fire. 

The Undertaker's feud with Mankind was renewed afterward, and they faced each other in a Hell in a Cell match at King of the Ring. During the match, the Undertaker threw Mankind off the roof of the 16 ft cell onto the Spanish announce table below, in what was a preplanned move. He later chokeslammed Mankind through the roof of the cell into the ring which legitimately knocked Mankind unconscious. Mankind also used thumbtacks in the match and was backdropped and chokeslammed onto them before Undertaker won the match with his Tombstone Piledriver. 

At Fully Loaded, the Undertaker and Stone Cold Steve Austin defeated Kane and Mankind to win the WWF Tag Team Championship. The Undertaker and Austin's reign as tag champions lasted for only two months, as Kane and Mankind regained the titles on an episode of Raw is War. The Undertaker then became the number one contender for the WWF Championship at SummerSlam, now held by Austin. Shortly before SummerSlam, however, the Undertaker revealed that he and Kane were working together as brothers. Despite this revelation, the Undertaker told Kane that he did not want him to interfere in the match with Austin, and even though the Undertaker lost the match, he handed Austin his belt back after the match in a show of respect. In September, the storyline continued, and the Undertaker began to show some villainous characteristics when he and Kane revealed the fact that they were in cahoots to rid Austin of his title for Vince McMahon. At , the Undertaker and Kane were booked in a Triple Threat match with Austin for his WWF Championship; McMahon stated that the brothers were not allowed to pin each other. The Undertaker and Kane pinned Austin simultaneously after a double chokeslam, so the title was vacated by McMahon. This event led to a match at between the two brothers for the title, with Austin as the special guest referee. Near the end of the match, Paul Bearer seemed about to assist Kane by handing him a steel chair to hit the Undertaker with, but as Kane had his back turned, both Bearer and the Undertaker hit Kane with the chair. The Undertaker went for the pin, but Austin refused to count the fall, attacked the Undertaker, and counted out both brothers. Finally, the Undertaker became a villain the next night on Raw is War for the first time in over six years, reconciling with Bearer and claiming that he and Bearer would unleash their Ministry of Darkness on the World Wrestling Federation. As part of this new storyline, he admitted that he had indeed set the fire that killed his parents, for which he had previously blamed Kane. 

After Survivor Series, the Undertaker returned his attention back to his previous feud with Austin for costing him the title at Judgment Day, hitting Austin in the head with a shovel during a title match with The Rock, returning the favor for what happened a month earlier. With this twist in the storyline, McMahon scheduled a Buried Alive match between the Undertaker and Austin at . In the weeks leading up to Rock Bottom, the Undertaker attempted to embalm Austin alive, tried to have Kane committed to a mental asylum, and had his druids chain Austin to his symbol, raising it high into the arena. The Undertaker, however, lost the match after Kane interfered. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.102) 

====Ministry of Darkness (1999)====
The Undertaker, wearing a variation of his Lord of Darkness attire, in late 2009.

After building up to his second heel run in the latter part of 1998, the Undertaker introduced an updated version of his Deadman identity by January 1999—the dark priest who in the initial period of this persona reigned over a stable known as the "Ministry of Darkness." In this form, he took on a wicked, Satanic presence, much more so than ever before. He often claimed to be invoking and taking orders from a "Higher Power." Moreover, he often appeared in a hooded black robe and sat on a throne that was specially designed into his character symbol. With the help of his minions, he often performed sacrifices on select WWE superstars, using various incantations and magic words with intent to extract out the dark side of the superstars in question so as to recruit them into his Ministry. The completed "Ministry of Darkness" consisted of The Brood (Edge, Christian and Gangrel); The Acolytes (Bradshaw and Faarooq); Mideon; and Viscera. Calaway himself did not wrestle for a period having undergone a hip replacement. As part of the angle, Undertaker expressed a desire to rid the World Wrestling Federation of its owner, Vince McMahon, and take control of the company. These ambitions culminated into a rivalry between The Ministry and The Corporation, ultimately resulting in a match between Undertaker and Corporation enforcer the Big Boss Man. The two faced off in a Hell in a Cell at WrestleMania XV, which Undertaker won. At Backlash, Undertaker defeated Corporation member Ken Shamrock after interference from Ministry member Bradshaw. 

Thereafter, the Undertaker kidnapped Stephanie McMahon, forcing Vince McMahon to enter into a reluctant alliance with his longtime nemesis Stone Cold Steve Austin. The Undertaker attempted to marry Stephanie in an eldritch ceremony conducted by Paul Bearer, but Austin was able to rescue her. At the Over the Edge pay-per-view, the Undertaker defeated Austin for his third WWF Championship with help from Shane McMahon, the special referee. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.103) The Undertaker later revealed that Vince McMahon had been his "Higher Power" all along. The Ministry eventually merged with The Corporation alliance to form the Corporate Ministry. After the Undertaker dropped the WWF Championship back to Austin following King of the Ring 1999, and an additional loss to him in a First Blood match at Fully Loaded, his relationship with the McMahons dissolved and the Corporate Ministry disbanded. 

The Undertaker then began a storyline where he teamed with The Big Show in a tag team known as the Unholy Alliance, which held the WWF Tag Team Championship twice. After their victory at SummerSlam (1999), the Undertaker suffered a groin tear and was seen limping in several matches. He avoided competing in wrestling matches in the following weeks, instead tyrannically ordering The Big Show to fight all his battles and oblige all his many wishes. To compensate for his lack of physical action, Undertaker became more vocal on the mic, often making smart-aleck remarks and performing commentary at the announcer's table. In an angle that occurred in September 1999 on SmackDown!, Undertaker was fired by Mr. McMahon in a backstage interview when he refused to participate in a casket match against Triple H. In actuality, Undertaker went on a four month hiatus from WWF in order to treat his groin injury. In January 2000, one week before a scheduled surprise return at the Royal Rumble, he tore a pectoral muscle.

====American Bad Ass/Big Evil (2000–2003)====
Undertaker at WrestleMania XIX
By his return in May 2000, the Undertaker had taken on a drastically different identity from before. He abandoned the somber mortician-themed attires, his funeral dirge ring music, allusions to the supernatural, and the accompanying morbid theatrics. In place of this, he took on a biker identity, riding to the ring on a motorcycle, and wearing sunglasses and bandanas to the ring. His entrance music was replaced with popular rock songs of the time, like Limp Bizkit's "Rollin' (Air Raid Vehicle)" and Kid Rock's "American Bad Ass" (from which the name of the Undertaker's new gimmick originated), though it was accompanied by the characteristic opening bell gong of the Undertaker's original theme.

Upon his return in May 2000, he took out all the members of the McMahon-Helmsley Faction, which caused him to once again be a fan favorite. He also targeted their leader, WWF Champion Triple H. At King of the Ring, the Undertaker teamed with The Rock and Kane to defeat the team of Triple H, Shane McMahon, and Vince McMahon. Afterward, he was booked to team with Kane to contend for the WWF Tag Team Championship. They defeated Edge and Christian, earning the right to face them the following week for the tag title, which Edge and Christian retained. Kane betrayed the Undertaker by chokeslamming him twice on the August 14 episode of Raw is War. This incident led to another match between the two at SummerSlam, which ended in a no contest as Kane ran from the ring area after the Undertaker removed Kane's mask. PWI Staff. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.106) 

The Undertaker then challenged Kurt Angle for the WWF Championship at Survivor Series. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.107) Angle, however, defeated the Undertaker after Kurt switched places with his real life brother, Eric Angle. The Undertaker demanded and was awarded a spot in the Six Man Hell in a Cell match for the WWF Championship at Armageddon. The Undertaker promised to make someone "famous" and did so when he chokeslamed Rikishi off the roof of the cell. 

In 2001, the Undertaker reunited with Kane as the Brothers of Destruction, challenging for the WWF Tag Team Championship once again. They received a shot at the title at No Way Out, facing Edge and Christian and then champions the Dudley Boyz in a Tables Match. The Brothers of Destruction dominated almost the entire match but were not the winners. The Undertaker then to defeated Triple H at WrestleMania X-Seven. He and Kane continued a storyline that focused on Triple H, who formed a "surprise alliance" with WWF Champion Stone Cold Steve Austin. The Brothers of Destruction were granted an opportunity to face Triple H and Austin for their titles. After the Undertaker and Kane acquired the WWF Tag Title from Edge and Christian, Triple H pinned Kane after attacking him with a sledgehammer at Backlash, where the Brothers of Destruction dropped the title. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.108–109) With Kane injured, the Undertaker feuded briefly with Steve Austin for his WWF Championship, but at Judgment Day, Austin retained his title. 

As part of "The Invasion" storyline, the Undertaker's next nemesis was Diamond Dallas Page, who was obsessively following the Undertaker's wife Sara. (While they were presented as being married from the start of the storyline, in reality, Mark and Sara got married during the height of this feud). At SummerSlam, WCW Tag Team Champions the Undertaker and Kane defeated Page and his partner Chris Kanyon in a steel cage match to win the WWF Tag Team Championship. At Survivor Series, the Undertaker teamed with Kane, The Rock, Chris Jericho, and The Big Show to take on The Alliance's Steve Austin, Booker T, Rob Van Dam, Shane McMahon, and Kurt Angle (this was the last time the Undertaker and Kane teamed until 2006). Angle pinned the Undertaker due to interference by Austin. After the Alliance was defeated, the Undertaker became a villain once again by forcing commentator Jim Ross to kiss Vince McMahon's ass. This was the beginning of a new persona for the Undertaker, as he cut his long hair short and called himself "Big Evil". At Vengeance, the Undertaker defeated Van Dam to capture the WWF Hardcore Championship. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.109–110) 

The Undertaker during his "Big Evil" persona
The Undertaker's next storyline began at the Royal Rumble in 2002 when Maven eliminated him by dropkicking him from behind. Subsequently, the Undertaker eliminated Maven in return and brutally assaulted him backstage. On an episode of SmackDown!, The Rock mentioned the Undertaker's elimination at the Royal Rumble, angering the Undertaker. The Undertaker responded by costing The Rock the number one contendership for the WWF Undisputed Championship. The storyline continued when The Rock cost the Undertaker his match with Maven for the Hardcore Championship. The two faced off at No Way Out, where the Undertaker lost due to interference from Ric Flair. This interference began a storyline with Flair, who declined a challenge to wrestle Undertaker at WrestleMania X8, and, as a result, Undertaker assaulted his son David Flair. Flair eventually accepted the match after the Undertaker threatened to inflict the same punishment on Flair's daughter. A no disqualification stipulation was added to the match, and the Undertaker defeated Flair. 

After the storyline with Flair, the Undertaker defeated Stone Cold Steve Austin at Backlash to win the number one contendership for the Undisputed WWF Championship. Later that night, he helped Hulk Hogan win his title match against the Undisputed Champion Triple H. The Undertaker then defeated Hogan for his fourth world championship at Judgment Day. The following night, the Undertaker was defeated by Rob Van Dam for the Undisputed Championship, however Ric Flair restarted the match and the Undertaker recaptured his championship. PWI Staff. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.110–111) On the July 1 episode of Raw, the Undertaker turned into a fan favorite again after defeating Jeff Hardy in a ladder match and raising Hardy's hand as a show of respect. The Undertaker, however, dropped the title at Vengeance to The Rock in a triple threat match that also involved Kurt Angle. The Undertaker was then switched from Raw to SmackDown! (where he stayed until the brand extension ended in 2010), alongside former Raw talent Brock Lesnar, Chris Benoit, and Eddie Guerrero. The Undertaker challenged Lesnar in a title match at Unforgiven that ended in a double-disqualification. Their feud carried over to No Mercy in a Hell in a Cell match. The Undertaker performed in the match with a legitimate broken hand and eventually lost to the champion. 

The Undertaker took a leave from wrestling after the Big Show threw him off the stage, sparking a feud. The Undertaker returned at the Royal Rumble in 2003. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.112–113) He immediately continued his feud with Big Show and defeated him by submission at No Way Out with a triangle choke. A-Train entered the storyline by attempting to attack the Undertaker after the match, but Nathan Jones came to his aid. The storyline resumed as the Undertaker began to train Jones to wrestle, and the two were scheduled to fight Big Show and A-Train in a tag team match at WrestleMania XIX. Jones, however, was removed prior to the match, making it a handicap match, which the Undertaker won with the help of Jones. 

Over the remainder of the year, the Undertaker entered a brief feud with John Cena and was booked to have two WWE Championship opportunities. The first, on the September 4 SmackDown!, against Kurt Angle, ended in a no contest, due to interference from Brock Lesnar. The second, at No Mercy, was a Biker Chain match between the Undertaker and Lesnar, which Lesnar won with the help of Vince McMahon. PWI Staff. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.113–114) This match resulted in a feud with McMahon, culminating at Survivor Series where the Undertaker lost a Buried Alive match against McMahon when Kane interfered. The Undertaker disappeared for some time following the match, with Kane claiming that he was "dead and buried forever." 

====Return of The Deadman (2004–2007)====
The Undertaker, awakening the arena lights as he enters the ring.
In the storyline leading up to WrestleMania XX, Kane was haunted by vignettes proclaiming the Undertaker's return. The first was during the Royal Rumble when the Undertaker's bells tolled, distracting Kane and allowing Booker T to eliminate him. Accompanied by Paul Bearer, the Undertaker returned as a hybrid version of The Deadman at WrestleMania XX and defeated Kane. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.115–116) At Judgment Day, the Undertaker defeated Booker T. Three months later, The Dudley Boyz kidnapped Bearer on Paul Heyman's orders. Thus, Heyman "took control" of Undertaker. On SmackDown, Undertaker attacked Rob Van Dam and John Cena. The next week, Cena confronted Undertaker and was booked by then-General Manager Kurt Angle to wrestle the Undertaker. Undertaker won after hitting Cena with his chain and delivering a Tombstone Piledriver. At The Great American Bash, Undertaker fought a handicap match against the Dudley Boyz, with the stipulation that if he didn't lay down and purposely lose, Heyman would bury Paul Bearer in cement. The Undertaker won and stopped Heyman from burying Bearer, but, after claiming Bearer was merely a liability he had no use for, buried him himself. 

The Undertaker began a feud with WWE Champion John "Bradshaw" Layfield (JBL) by challenging to a title match at SummerSlam, which the Undertaker lost by disqualification. At No Mercy, the Undertaker and JBL competed in the first ever Last Ride match, although the Undertaker lost after Heidenreich interfered. After a brief program with Heidenreich, PWI Staff. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.116–117) The Undertaker turned his focus to the WWE Championship once again. Along with Eddie Guerrero and Booker T, he challenged JBL to a championship rematch at Armageddon in a Fatal Four-Way match, in which the Undertaker was unsuccessful, again due to Heidenreich's interference. The feud culminated in a Casket match between the Undertaker and Heidenreich at the Royal Rumble, where the Undertaker sealed Heidenreich in a casket for the victory. 

Soon after, Randy Orton challenged the Undertaker to a match at WrestleMania 21, and claimed that he would end his WrestleMania winning streak . Even with help from his father "Cowboy" Bob Orton, Randy lost and the Undertaker improved his WrestleMania record to 13–0. He returned for the June 16 episode of SmackDown! but lost to JBL, thanks to interference from Randy Orton. After The Great American Bash, the Undertaker became the number one contender to the World Heavyweight Championship, a position that JBL felt he should have. As part of the feud, on the following SmackDown!, the Undertaker lost a number one contender match against JBL, once again due to interference from Orton. With this, the Undertaker resumed his feud with Orton. At SummerSlam, Orton defeated the Undertaker in a WrestleMania rematch. PWI Staff. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.118) The storyline intensified as the two taunted each other with caskets, leading to a casket match at No Mercy, in which the Undertaker lost to Randy and his father "Cowboy" Bob Orton. After the match, the Ortons poured gasoline on the casket and set it on fire. When the charred casket was opened, however, the Undertaker had once again vanished. He returned at the Survivor Series, emerging from a burning casket. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p. 119) The Undertaker returned to SmackDown! in early December to haunt Orton and set up a Hell in a Cell match at Armageddon. After winning the match, Calaway took a brief hiatus from wrestling.

The Undertaker retaining his undefeated streak at WrestleMania 22.
In early 2006 at the Royal Rumble, the Undertaker returned during Kurt Angle's celebration of his World Title defense against Mark Henry on a horse-drawn cart, signaling for a title shot. As part of their storyline feud, the Undertaker lost his match with Angle at No Way Out after a thirty minute bout. Undertaker cornered Angle after the match and told him he was not finished with him; however during a rematch on SmackDown! Henry attacked the Undertaker from behind, costing him the title. This led to the Undertaker challenging Henry to a Casket match at WrestleMania 22, and Henry - like Orton a year before - vowed to end Undertaker's WrestleMania winning streak. The Undertaker defeated Henry to become 14–0 at WrestleMania. During a rematch on the next episode of SmackDown!, The Great Khali made his debut and assaulted the Undertaker to transition into a new storyline.

The Undertaker was not heard from until the May 5 episode of SmackDown!, as Theodore Long delivered a challenge from the Undertaker to Khali for a match at Judgment Day. The Undertaker lost to Khali, 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.121) and he did not appear again until the July 4 episode of SmackDown!, when he accepted Khali's challenge to a Punjabi Prison match at The Great American Bash. Khali, however, was removed from the match and was not medically fit and was replaced by ECW Champion The Big Show, over whom the Undertaker gained the victory. In the storyline, Teddy Long replaced Khali with Big Show as punishment for an attack on the Undertaker shortly before the match. Khali was then challenged to a Last Man Standing match at SummerSlam after interfering in the Undertaker's match with World Heavyweight Champion King Booker. Khali refused the challenge for SummerSlam, though Long made the match official for the August 18 episode of SmackDown! instead. The Undertaker won the match by striking Khali with the steel stairs, delivering several chair shots, and finishing him with a chokeslam. 

The Undertaker's next match was with WWE United States Champion Mr. Kennedy at No Mercy but was disqualified in the match after he hit Kennedy with the championship belt. PWI Staff. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.122) On the November 3 episode of SmackDown!, the Undertaker reunited with Kane to form the Brothers of Destruction for the first time in five years, defeating the reluctant opposition team of Mr. Kennedy and MVP, with whom Kane was feuding with at the time. As part of the storyline, Kennedy defeated the Undertaker in a First Blood match at Survivor Series after interference from MVP, but finally defeated Kennedy in a Last Ride match at Armageddon. The two continued to feud into 2007 as Kennedy cost the Undertaker two World Heavyweight Championship opportunities for a championship match at the Royal Rumble. 2007 Wrestling almanac & book of facts. "Wrestling’s historical cards" (p.130) 

====World Heavyweight Champion (2007–2010)====
The Undertaker won his first Royal Rumble match in 2007, in doing so becoming the first man to enter the Rumble at number 30 and win the match. He then began a storyline with Batista, whom he defeated at WrestleMania 23 to win his first World Heavyweight Championship. At Backlash in a Last Man Standing match, they had a rematch that ended in a draw when neither man was able to answer the ten-count, resulting in the Undertaker retaining the Championship. On the May 11 episode of SmackDown!, the Undertaker and Batista participated in a steel cage match that ended in a draw when both men's feet touched the floor at the same time. After the match, Mark Henry returned and assaulted the Undertaker. Immediately after the assault, Edge cashed in his Money in the Bank title shot, and the Undertaker dropped the World Heavyweight Championship to Edge. As the Undertaker laid in the ring, druids appeared and carried him to the backstage area.

The Undertaker, after defeating Edge at WrestleMania XXIV.
During Calaway's rehabilitation, Henry quickly defeated local jobbers and bragged about his assault on Undertaker, until vignettes began playing promoting the Undertaker's return. The Undertaker returned at Unforgiven, defeating Henry and again on SmackDown! two weeks later. Batista and the Undertaker reignited their feud at Cyber Sunday with the fans choosing the special guest referee Stone Cold Steve Austin, but Batista retained the world title. They battled again inside a Hell in a Cell at Survivor Series where Edge returned and interfered to help Batista retain the World Heavyweight Championship. In response to this, the Undertaker delivered a Tombstone piledriver to General Manager Vickie Guerrero, on the next SmackDown!, sending her to the hospital. Returning Assistant-General Manager Theodore Long declared a Triple Threat match for the title at Armageddon, which Edge won.

At No Way Out, the Undertaker defeated Batista, Finlay, The Great Khali, Montel Vontavious Porter, and Big Daddy V in an Elimination Chamber, to become the number one contender for Edge's World Heavyweight Championship at WrestleMania XXIV. He defeated Edge at WrestleMania with his Hell's Gate submission hold, to win his second World Heavyweight Championship in his 16th WrestleMania win. In a WrestleMania rematch, the Undertaker defeated Edge once again at Backlash to retain the World Heavyweight Championship. Vickie Guerrero announced that the Undertaker's Hell's Gate was an illegal hold and stripped him of the title. The Undertaker battled Edge for the vacant title at Judgment Day, which he won by countout. Vickie ordered that the title remain vacant, because titles cannot change hands in this way. Edge and the Undertaker faced each other again for the vacant championship at One Night Stand in a Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match, which the Undertaker lost after interference from La Familia. As a result of the stipulation, Undertaker was forced to leave WWE.

The Undertaker, after defeating Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania XXV.
On the July 25, 2008 episode of SmackDown, Vickie Guerrero announced that she had reinstated the Undertaker, and that Edge would face him at SummerSlam in a Hell in a Cell match, which the Undertaker won. After the match, the Undertaker chokeslammed Edge from the top of a ladder and through the ring canvas. Following this match, Guerrero tried to make a peace offering with the Undertaker on SmackDown by apologizing, but the Undertaker told her that he is not the forgiving kind. At Unforgiven, as the Undertaker approached the ring to "take Guerrero's soul" and take her in a casket, the Big Show, who appeared at first to aid the Undertaker, betrayed and assaulted him. As a result of this altercation, the Undertaker and Big Show faced each other in a match at No Mercy, where the Big Show knocked the Undertaker out with two hook punches in the forehead and a punch to the back of Undertaker's head. At Cyber Sunday, the Undertaker defeated the Big Show in a Last Man Standing match after applying Hell's Gate. Then the Undertaker was engaged in a short feud with Jeff Hardy who interfered during his match with Vladimir Kozlov. But the feud ended when Jeff Hardy defeated the Undertaker in an Extreme rules match the following week on Smackdown due to the interference of The Big Show. The Undertaker then went on to defeat the Big Show at Survivor Series in a casket match, to end the feud. 
At No Way Out, the Undertaker was part of the WWE Championship Elimination Chamber match; however, he was unsuccessful at winning the match. He then became embroiled in a long time feud with Shawn Michaels over his WrestleMania undefeated streak and the fact that the Undertaker had never defeated Michaels in a singles match previously. The feud culminated in a match at WrestleMania XXV which the Undertaker won. On the April 24 episode of SmackDown, Big Show defeated him in a singles match by knockout after the match, Undertaker attacked Big Show. After SmackDown, Undertaker took another hiatus from WWE on April 25, 2009.

After the four month hiatus, the Undertaker returned at SummerSlam in August by attacking CM Punk, who had just won the World Heavyweight Championship from Jeff Hardy in a Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match. At Breaking Point, the Undertaker faced Punk in a submission match. The Undertaker had originally won the match with his Hell's Gate submission hold, but the match was restarted by SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long, who ruled that the ban placed on the move by Vickie Guerrero was still in effect. Punk went on to win the match with his Anaconda Vise when referee Scott Armstrong called for the bell, despite Undertaker never submitting in a recreation of the Montreal Screwjob, which took place in the same venue in 1997. On the September 25 episode of SmackDown, Theodore Long announced that the ban had now been officially lifted, after being released from a casket that the Undertaker had apparently placed him in. The feud between the two continued and at the Hell in a Cell pay-per-view, the Undertaker won the World Heavyweight Championship from Punk in a Hell in a Cell match. The Undertaker successfully defended the title against CM Punk on SmackDown, in a Fatal Four Way match at Bragging Rights, and in a Triple Threat match at Survivor Series. He faced Batista at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs for the championship, and won when the match was restarted by Long, after Batista had originally won after utilising a low blow. 

The Undertaker defending his World Heavyweight Championship at Royal Rumble 2010.
At the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view, a pyrotechnics malfunction momentarily engulfed the Undertaker in flames during his ring entrance. He was able to continue with his scheduled match, with a burn on his chest that "looked like a bad sunburn" according to a WWE spokesman. He lost the World Heavyweight Championship to Chris Jericho after interference from Shawn Michaels. Undertaker had been rebuffing Michaels' requests for a WrestleMania rematch, but the night after Elimination Chamber he agreed to the match on the condition that Michaels' career was on the line. At WrestleMania, the Undertaker defeated Michaels to end his career in a match with no countouts or disqualifications. 

After a hiatus (which included wrestling two matches on Raw), he returned to SmackDown on May 28, defeating Rey Mysterio to qualify for a spot in the Fatal 4-Way pay-per-view to compete for the World Heavyweight Championship. During the match, the Undertaker suffered a concussion, broken orbital bone, and broken nose; he was visibly bleeding profusely on camera by the end of the match. To cover for the injury, Kane revealed the Undertaker had been found in a vegetative state; Mysterio took his place in the match and won the World Heavyweight Championship. While attempting to learn which superstar had attacked the Undertaker, Kane defeated Mysterio to win the World Heavyweight Championship. Kane and Mysterio continued to clash as they accused one another of being the assailant behind the attack. 

At SummerSlam, the Undertaker returned to confront Kane and Rey Mysterio, only to be overpowered and Tombstoned by Kane. With Kane revealed as his attacker, the two feuded for the next few months over the World Heavyweight Championship. After losing to Kane at Night of Champions, Paul Bearer returned as Undertaker's manager on an episode of SmackDown. However, Bearer attacked him at Hell in a Cell to help Kane win once again. The feud ended at Bragging Rights when The Nexus helped Kane defeat Undertaker in a Buried Alive match. In reality, he needed medical treatment for his injury.

====Defending & The End Of The Streak (2011–2014)====
The Brothers of Destruction make their exit at Raw 1000.
After the 2011 Royal Rumble, promotional videos began airing, showing the Undertaker entering and standing within a Western-style old house on a rainy desert. Each promo ended with the date 2–21–11 being "burned into" the screen. On the February 21 Raw, the Undertaker returned. Before he could speak, Triple H also returned and confronted him. The two challenged each other to a match at WrestleMania in a unique interaction involving no verbal or physical exchanges, which was later announced as a No Holds Barred match. On the March 28 episode of Raw, the two had a last confrontation with the presence of Shawn Michaels before WrestleMania that involved praise, demonstrations of respect, and conflicts. At WrestleMania XXVII, the Undertaker defeated Triple H via submission, but had to be carried away from the ring on a stretcher. 
The Undertaker approaching the ring at WrestleMania XXX in 2014.
On the January 30, 2012 episode of Raw, the Undertaker returned after a ten-month hiatus to confront Triple H. On the February 13 episode of Raw, Triple H refused the Undertaker's challenge for a WrestleMania rematch. After the Undertaker accused Triple H of living in the shadow of Shawn Michaels on the February 20 episode of Raw, Triple H accepted the challenge on the condition that it be a Hell in a Cell match; Michaels was later inserted as referee in the match. At WrestleMania XXVIII, Undertaker, debuting his new look, a mohawk, defeated Triple H to extend his streak to 20–0. After the match, Undertaker and Michaels carried Triple H to the entrance stage, where the three embraced. Later in 2012, the Undertaker appeared on the 1000th episode of Raw on July 23 to help Kane, who had been confronted by Jinder Mahal, Curt Hawkins, Tyler Reks, Hunico, Camacho, and Drew McIntyre. The Brothers of Destruction overcame and dominated the six other wrestlers. 

The Undertaker's next television appearance was on Old School Raw on March 4, 2013, where he opened the show by performing his signature entrance. CM Punk, Randy Orton, Big Show, and Sheamus fought in a Fatal Four-Way match to determine who would face him at WrestleMania 29, which Punk won. Following this, Undertaker made another entrance and stared Punk down. After the real-life death of Paul Bearer on March 5, 2013, a storyline involving Punk regularly spiting the Undertaker through displays of flippancy and disrespect towards Bearer's death began. Punk interrupted the Undertaker's ceremony to honor Bearer on Raw, stealing the trademark urn and later using it to attack Kane, humiliate the Brothers of Destruction and mock Bearer. Undertaker defeated Punk at WrestleMania 29 to extend his streak to 21–0 and then took back the urn. http://www.wwe.com/shows/wrestlemania/29/wrestlemania-29-results-26104708 The following night on Raw, Undertaker came out to pay his respects to Paul Bearer, but was interrupted by the Shield, who attempted to attack Undertaker before Kane and Daniel Bryan made the save. Undertaker wrestled his first Raw match in three years on the April 22 episode, teaming with Kane and Bryan against the Shield in a losing effort. Four days later, he wrestled his first Smackdown match in three years, defeating Shield member Dean Ambrose via submission. Afterward, Undertaker was attacked by Ambrose and the rest of the Shield, who powerbombed him through the announce table. 

On the February 24, 2014 episode of Raw, the Undertaker returned to confront Brock Lesnar and accepted his challenge for a match at WrestleMania XXX. After a long match and three F5's, Lesnar defeated Undertaker by pinfall to end the streak in what was described as "the most shocking result in WWE history". Following the match, The Undertaker was hospitalized with a severe concussion. 

===Undertaker character===
The Undertaker makes his unique entrance.
The Undertaker gimmick has two polar opposite identities. The first is the "Deadman", an undead and macabre entity full of scare tactics. The Deadman has come in several different versions. The Undertaker's on-camera debut at Survivor Series 1990 saw the introduction of the first version. Here, he portrayed a Western mortician — donned in black attire with gray accessories and impervious to pain. Not long after his debut he began being accompanied to the ring by the ghoulish manager, Paul Bearer, who carried an urn which contained his "powers". By SummerSlam 1994, he began appearing as a mystic, chilling superhuman represented by cool colors, replacing the gray with purple and utilizing blue fog for the first time. At Survivor Series 1996, the Deadman transformed into the gothic "Lord of Darkness". By January 1999, he began appearing as the ritual-performing dark priest of a stable called the Ministry of Darkness. From May 2000 to November 2003, The Undertaker abandoned his undead persona, instead adapting the gimmick of a biker commonly referred to as "The American Bad-Ass". The American Bad-Ass gimmick ended at Survivor Series 2003, when he was buried alive by Kane. Undertaker returned at WrestleMania XX to get revenge on Kane, returning with many of his original scare tactics associated with his Deadman persona. 

The Undertaker is connected with various specialty matches, including the Casket match, the Bodybag match, the Buried Alive match, the Hell in a Cell match, and the Last Ride match. In 1997, the Undertaker gimmick was embellished with a dramatic pre-WWF/WWE personal life that enhanced the character with a youth backstory. A key part of this backstory is the character's half-brother, Kane, who was introduced in 1997 and has both feuded and allied (as a tag team called the Brothers of Destruction) with the Undertaker. His undefeated streak at WrestleMania became a driving point for storylines. Over time he became less impervious to pain, having to be stretchered out after his match at WrestleMania XXVII, and eventually gaining a loss at the hands of Brock Lesnar at WrestleMania XXX. Calaway suffered a concussion during the event.

==Personal life==
Calaway married his first wife, Jodi Lynn, in 1989. They had a son, Gunner, born in 1993. The marriage ended in 1999. Calaway married his second wife, Sara, in St Petersburg, Florida on July 21, 2000. In 2001, Sara made televised appearances with the WWF as part of a feud between Calaway and Diamond Dallas Page, in which she was acknowledged as being Calaway's wife. The couple had two daughters together: Chasey (born on November 21, 2002) and Gracie (born on May 15, 2005). As of 2007, he and Sara were divorced, and he became romantically linked to former wrestler Michelle McCool, whom he married on June 26, 2010, in Houston, Texas. On August 1, 2012, it was announced that they were expecting the couple's first child. Kaia Faith Calaway was born on August 29, 2012. 

Calaway is an avid boxing fan and carried the Flag of the United States while leading Team Pacquiao to the ring during the Pacquiao vs. Velázquez fight in 2005. He was also in attendance at the Lennox Lewis vs Mike Tyson fight in 2002.

Calaway is also an avid mixed martial arts fan and has attended several Ultimate Fighting Championship shows, including a show where Calaway verbally confronted then UFC fighter Brock Lesnar after Lesnar lost to Cain Velasquez, and his striking gloves and Hell's Gate submission (Modified gogoplata) were also inspired by mixed martial arts. During a Calaway interview conducted by an internet show after UFC 121, Lesnar walked past him staring. Calaway answered Lesnar's stare by saying "You wanna do it?". He is a close friend of mixed martial artists, Pat Miletich, Jeremy Horn, Matt Hughes and the actor, Tony Longo. 

Calaway invests in real estate with business partner Scott Everhart. Calaway and Everhart finished construction on a $2.7m building in Loveland, Colorado, called "The Calahart", a portmanteau of their last names. Calaway and his ex-wife Sara established The Zeus Compton Calaway Save the Animals fund at the Texas A&M College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences to help pay for lifesaving treatments for large-breed dogs. , Accessed September 19, 2011. "The Zeus Compton Calaway Save the Animals Fund" 

==Other media==
Calaway made his feature film debut as Hutch in the 1991 film Suburban Commando. He had guest roles on and Celebrity Deathmatch. In 2001, Calaway appeared out of character on the Canadian sports show Off the Record with Michael Landsberg.

==Filmography==

===Film===

 Year Title Role Notes 
 1991 Suburban Commando Hutch 
 1999 Beyond the Mat Himself Documentary 

===Television===

 Year Title Role Notes 
 1999 Soul chaser demon \"Brothers Keeper\" and \"The Mephisto Strain\" 
 1999 Downtown the Undertaker \"The Con\" 
 1999 Celebrity Deathmatch the Undertaker \"Halloween Episode I\" 

==In wrestling==
The Undertaker executing the Tombstone Piledriver on Edge.
The Undertaker attempts to perform the Last Ride on Brock Lesnar.
The Undertaker locking in Hell's Gate on Brock Lesnar.
The Undertaker jumping down from the top rope to strike Heidenreich with Old School.
*Finishing moves

**World Wrestling Federation/World Wrestling Entertainment/WWE
***Chokeslam - 1990–present; usually used as a signature move
***Hell's Gate / Devil's Triangle (Modified gogoplata) – 2008–present
***Last Ride (Elevated powerbomb) - 2000–2003; used as a signature move thereafter
***Tombstone Piledriver (Kneeling reverse piledriver), most often followed by a "Rest in Peace" pin – 1990–present
***Triangle choke – 2002–2003; used as a regular move until 2006
**Early career
***Callous Clutch / Iron Claw (One-handed clawhold) – used rarely as a signature move in WWE
***Flatliner Fist (Heart punch) 
***Heatseeking Missile (Ropewalk diving elbow drop) Mean Mark Callous vs Johnny Ace 

*Signature moves

**Ballistic punching combination, often finished with a throat thrust
**Bear hug hold transitioned into a vertical running thrust spinebuster to the ring post
**Belly-to-back suplex
**Big boot 
**Chokehold – 1990–1995; used rarely thereafter
**Cravate hangman
**Elbow drop
**Fallaway slam
**Fujiwara armbar 
**Knee lift to the opponent's midsection 
**Multiple clothesline variations 
***Corner 
***Leaping flying 
***Rebound 
***Short-arm
**Old School (Arm twist ropewalk chop) – Adopted from Don Jardine 
**Over the top rope suicide dive
**Reverse STO 
**Running DDT 
**Running leg drop, sometimes to an apron-hung opponent 
**Sidewalk slam 
**Snake Eyes, followed by a running big boot 
**Takin' Care of Business / TCB (Standing dragon sleeper) - used rarely
**Vertical suplex, sometimes from the top rope
**Wrist lock hold transitioned to an elevated arm wrench or followed by multiple shoulder blocks

*Managers
**General Skandor Akbar 
**Ted DiBiase
**Paul Bearer (WWF/E) / Percy Pringle III (WCCW) 
**Brother Love 
**Paul E. Dangerously 
**Downtown Bruno 
**Theodore Long 
**Dutch Mantell 
**Sara 

*Nicknames
**"The American Bad-Ass" 
**"Big Evil" 
**"The Deadman" 
**"The Demon of Death Valley" 
**"The Lord of Darkness" 
**"The Phenom" 
**"The Red Devil" 
**"The Cornerstone of the WWF/E" 

*Entrance themes

**New Japan Pro Wrestling
***"Miracle Man" by Ozzy Osbourne
**World Championship Wrestling
***"China White" by Scorpions
**United States Wrestling Association
***"Sands of Time" 
**World Wrestling Federation/World Wrestling Entertainment/WWE
***"Funeral March" by Jim Johnston (based off Frédéric Chopin's piece) (November 19, 1990 – January 22, 1994)
***"The Grim Reaper" by Jim Johnston (August 29, 1994 – November 13, 1995)
***"Graveyard Symphony" by Jim Johnston (November 19, 1995 – July 20, 1998; January 11, 1999 – March 22, 1999)
***"Dark Side" by Jim Johnston (July 26, 1998 – December 13, 1998)
***"Ministry" by Jim Johnston (March 28, 1999 – September 23, 1999)
***"Unholy" by Jim Johnston (June 7, 1999 - September 20, 1999) 
***"American Bad Ass" by Kid Rock (May 21, 2000 – December 4, 2000)
***"Rollin' (Air Raid Vehicle)" by Limp Bizkit (December 10, 2000 – May 6, 2002; March 30, 2003)
***"Dead Man" by Jim Johnston (May 19, 2002 – September 19, 2002)
***"You're Gonna Pay" by Jim Johnston (September 22, 2002 – November 16, 2003)
***"Rest in Peace" by Jim Johnston (March 14, 2004 – February 21, 2011; January 30, 2012 – present)
***VI: Ain't No Grave|"Ain't No Grave (Gonna Hold This Body Down)"] by Johnny Cash (March 7, 2011 – April 3, 2011) 

==Championships and accomplishments==

*Pro Wrestling Illustrated
**PWI Feud of the Year (1991) vs. The Ultimate Warrior
**PWI Match of the Year (1998) vs. Mankind in a Hell in a Cell match at King of the Ring
**PWI Match of the Year (2009) vs. Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania XXV
**PWI Match of the Year (2010) vs. Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania XXVI
**PWI Match of the Year (2012) vs. Triple H at WrestleMania XXVIII
**PWI ranked him #2 of the 500 best singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2002
**PWI ranked him #21 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the "PWI Years" in 2003
*United States Wrestling Association
**USWA Unified World Heavyweight Championship (1 time) 

*World Class Wrestling Association
**WCWA Texas Heavyweight Championship (1 time) 

*World Wrestling Federation / World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE
**World Heavyweight Championship (3 times) World Heavyweight Title (WWE Smackdown!) history At wrestling-titles.com 
**WWF/WWE Undisputed Championship (4 times) WWWF/WWF/WWE World Heavyweight Title history At wrestling-titles.com 
**WWF Hardcore Championship (1 time) WWF/WWE Hardcore Title history At wrestling-titles.com 
**World Tag Team Championship (6 times) – with Stone Cold Steve Austin (1), Big Show (2), The Rock (1) and Kane (2) WWWF/WWF/WWE World Tag Team Title history At wrestling-titles.com 
**WCW World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Kane WCW World Tag Team Title history At wrestling-titles.com 
**Royal Rumble (2007)
**Slammy Award for WWF's Greatest Hit (1996) Sucking Diesel into the abyss
**Slammy Award for Best Tattoo (1997)
**Slammy Award for Best Entrance Music (1997)
**Slammy Award for Star of the Highest Magnitude (1997)
**Slammy Award for Match of the Year (2009) 
**Slammy Award for Moment of the Year (2010) 
**Slammy Award OMG Moment of the Year (2011) 
**Slammy Award Match of the Year (2012) 

*Wrestling Observer Newsletter
**5 Star Match (1997) vs. Shawn Michaels in a Hell in a Cell at Blood: In Your House|Badd Blood].
**Best Gimmick (1990–1994) 
**Best Heel (1991) 
**Feud of the Year (2007) vs. Batista 
**Match of the Year (2009) vs. Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania XXV 
**Match of the Year (2010) vs. Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania XXVI 
**Most Overrated (2001) 
**Readers' Least Favorite Wrestler (2001) 
**Worst Feud of the Year (1993) vs. Giant González 
**Worst Worked Match of the Year (2001) with Kane vs. KroniK at Unforgiven 
**Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 2004)

===WrestleMania Streak===

 WM Opponent Record Notes 
 Jimmy Snuka 
 Jake Roberts 
 Giant González 
 King Kong Bundy 
 Diesel 
 Sycho Sid 
 Kane 
 Big Boss Man 
 Triple H 
 Ric Flair 
 The Big Show & A-Train 
 Kane 
 Randy Orton 
 Mark Henry 
 Batista 
 Edge 
 Shawn Michaels 
 Shawn Michaels 
 Triple H 
 Triple H 
 CM Punk 
 Brock Lesnar 

==References==

==External links==

*
*
*


