[[Yukon]]

Yukon is the westernmost and smallest of Canada's three federal territories. Although it has the smallest land mass, Yukon has the largest population out of the three territories. Whitehorse is the territorial capital.

The territory was split from the Northwest Territories in 1898. Receiving royal assent on March 27, 2002, the federal government modernized the Yukon Act to confirm "Yukon" as the current standard, though "Yukon Territory" remains the more popular usage. Though officially bilingual (English and French), the Yukon Government also recognizes First Nations languages.

At 5959 m, Yukon's Mount Logan, in Kluane National Park and Reserve, is the highest mountain in Canada and the second-highest on the North American continent (after Denali in the U.S. state of Alaska). The territory's climate is Arctic in the north (north of Old Crow), subarctic in the central region, between north of Whitehorse and Old Crow, and has a humid continental climate in the far south, south of Whitehorse and in areas close to the British Columbia border. Several rivers run through Yukon, some being the Stewart River, Peel River, and ever famous Yukon River.

The Territory was named after the Yukon River.

== History ==

Long before the arrival of Europeans, central and northern Yukon was populated by First Nations people, and the area escaped glaciation. The volcanic eruption of Mount Churchill in approximately 800 AD in the U.S. state of Alaska blanketed southern Yukon with a layer of ash which can still be seen along the Klondike Highway and forms part of the oral tradition of First Nations peoples in the Yukon and further south.

Coastal and inland First Nations had extensive trading networks. European incursions into the area only began early in the 19th century with the fur trade, followed by missionaries and the Western Union Telegraph Expedition. By the 1870s and 1880s gold miners began to arrive. This drove a population increase that justified the establishment of a police force, just in time for the start of the Klondike Gold Rush in 1897. The increased population coming with the gold rush led to the separation of the Yukon district from the Northwest Territories and the formation of the separate Yukon Territory in 1898.

Sites of archaeological significance in Yukon hold some of the earliest evidence of the presence of human occupation in North America. Services, Cultural. Archaeology Program. Department of Tourism and Culture. March 8th, 2011. April 7th, 2012. http://www.tc.gov.yk.ca/archaeology.html. The sites safeguard the history of the first people and the earliest First Nations of the Yukon. More information is found in the Yukon Archaeology Program.

== Geography ==
Map of the Yukon

The territory is the approximate shape of a right triangle, bordering the U.S. state of Alaska to the west for 1,210 km (752 mi) mostly along longitude 141° W, the Northwest Territories to the east and British Columbia to the south. Its northern coast is on the Beaufort Sea. Its ragged eastern boundary mostly follows the divide between the Yukon Basin and the Mackenzie River drainage basin to the east in the Mackenzie mountains.

Most of the territory is in the watershed of its namesake, the Yukon River. The southern Yukon is dotted with a large number of large, long and narrow glacier-fed alpine lakes, most of which flow into the Yukon River system. The larger lakes include Teslin Lake, Atlin Lake, Tagish Lake, Marsh Lake, Lake Laberge, Kusawa Lake and Kluane Lake. Bennett Lake on the Klondike Gold Rush trail is a lake flowing into Nares Lake, with the greater part of its area within the Yukon.

Canada's highest point, Mount Logan (5959 m), is in the territory's southwest. Mount Logan and a large part of the Yukon's southwest are in Kluane National Park and Reserve, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Other national parks include Ivvavik National Park and Vuntut National Park in the north.
Mount Logan from the southeast

Other watersheds include the Mackenzie River, the Peel Watershed and the Alsek–Tatshenshini, and a number of rivers flowing directly into the Beaufort Sea. The two main Yukon rivers flowing into the Mackenzie in the Northwest Territories are the Liard River in the southeast and the Peel River and its tributaries in the northeast.

Notable widespread tree species within the Yukon are the Black Spruce and White Spruce. Many trees are stunted because of the short growing season and severe climate. Carl Duncan, "The Dempster: Highway to the Arctic" accessed 2009.10.22. 

The capital, Whitehorse, is also the largest city, with about two-thirds of the population; the second largest is Dawson City (pop. 1,327), which was the capital until 1952.

=== Climate ===

+Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for selected locations in the Yukon 
 City July (°C) July (°F) January (°C) January (°F) 
 Whitehorse 21/8 69/46 −13/−22 8/−8 
 Dawson City 23/8 74/47 −23/−31 −9/−24 
 Old Crow 21/9 69/48 −27/−36 −15/−32 

== Demographics ==

In the 2011 Census, Yukon had a population of 33,897 living in 14,117 of its 16,259 total dwellings, an 11.6% change from its 2006 population of 30,372. With a land area of 474712.64 km2, it had a population density of in 2011. 

=== Municipalities by population ===

Distribution of Yukon's eight municipalities by type

=== Ethnicity ===

The 2006 Canadian census examined Canadians' ethnicity and ancestry (beyond grandparents). Out of a Yukon population of 30,195, only 13,045 (43%) responded with a single answer, 57% of respondents selected multiple ethnicity making a 'simple' assessment of the ethnic portrait impossible. From the total answers (118,035) 13% are of aboriginal, North American Indian, or Métis origin. This percentage might be a little higher if the 'Canadian' origin includes both First Nations people and European descendents. The categories for other origins are confounding ('European' vs 'Western European' vs 'French' vs 'Scottish', etc.) and therefore a further breakdown is not realistic. According to the Statistics Canada 2006 Community Profiles page, Yukoners of aboriginal identity population (including all persons with treaty status or band registry) represent 25% of the population. 

=== Language ===

 First Nations linguistic groups by tribes/clans Council of Yukon First Nations 
 Linguistic group Tribe/clan 
 Gwich'in Vuntut Gwitchin First Nation, Old Crow 
 Hän Tr'ondëk Hwëch'in First Nation, Dawson City 
 Upper Tanana White River First Nation, Beaver Creek * Small communities near Tok (Alaska) 
 Northern Tutchone Selkirk First Nation * Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation * First Nation of Nacho Nyak Dun, Mayo 
 Southern Tutchone Champagne and Aishihik First Nations, Haines Junction * Kluane First Nation, Burwash Landing * Ta'an Kwach'an Council, Lake Laberge * Kwanlin Dün First Nation, Whitehorse 
 Kaska Ross River Dena Council, Ross River * Liard River First Nation, Watson Lake 
 Inland Tlingit Teslin Tlingit Council 
 Tagish Carcross/Tagish First Nation 

 Mother tongue, 2006 census 
 Rank Language Population Percent 
 1. English 25,655 85.69% 
 2. French 1,105 3.69% 
 3. German 775 2.59% 
 4. Chinese 260 0.87% 
 5. Tagalog 145 0.48% 
 6. Dutch 140 0.47% 
 7. Spanish 130 0.43% 
 8. Vietnamese 105 0.35% 
 9. Hungarian 80 0.27% 
 10. Punjabi 80 0.27% 
 11. Gwich'in 75 0.25% 
 12. Tlingit 70 0.11% 
 13. Yakuts (Sakha) 65 0.11% 

The most commonly reported mother tongue among the 33,145 single responses to the 2011 Canadian census was English at 28,065 (). The second-most common was 1,455 () for French. Among 510 multiple respondents, 140 of them () reported a mother tongue of both English and French, while 335 () reported English and a 'non-official language' and 20 () reported French and a 'non-official language'. 

The Language Act of Yukon "recognises the significance" of aboriginal languages in Yukon; however, only English and French are available for laws, court proceedings, and legislative assembly proceedings. 

=== Religion ===

The largest denominations by number of adherents according to the 2001 census were the Roman Catholic Church with 5,975 (22 percent); the Anglican Church of Canada with 3,795 (13 percent); and the United Church of Canada with 2,105 (7 percent). 37.4% of residents claimed no religion. 

== Economy ==
Yukon's historical major industry has been mining (lead, zinc, silver, gold, asbestos and copper). The government acquired the land from the Hudson's Bay Company in 1870 and split it from the Northwest Territories in 1898 to fill the need for local government created by the population influx of the gold rush.

Thousands of these prospectors flooded the territory, creating a colourful period recorded by authors such as Robert W. Service and Jack London. The memory of this period and the early days of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, as well as the territory's scenic wonders and outdoor recreation opportunities, makes tourism the second most important industry.

Manufacturing, including furniture, clothing, and handicrafts, follows in importance, along with hydroelectricity. The traditional industries of trapping and fishing have declined. Today, the government sector is by far the biggest employer in the territory, directly employing approximately 5,000 out of a labour force of 12,500.

=== Tourism ===
Yukon welcome sign
Yukon's tourism motto is "Larger than life". Travel Yukon Yukon's major appeal is its nearly pristine nature. Tourism relies heavily on this, and there are many organised outfitters and guides available to hunters and anglers and nature lovers of all sorts. Sports enthusiasts can paddle lakes and rivers with canoes and kayaks, ride or walk trails, ski or snowboard in an organised setting or access the backcountry by air or snowmobile, climb the highest peaks in Canada or take a family hike up smaller mountains, or try ice climbing and dog sledding.

Yukon also has a wide array of cultural and sporting events and infrastructures that attract artists, participants and tourists from all parts of the world; Yukon International Storytelling Festival, Frostbite Music Festival, Dawson Music Festival, Yukon Quest, Sourdough Rendezvous, the Yukon Beringia Interpretive Centre, Northern Lights Centre, Klondike Gold Rush memorials and activities, "Takhini Hot Springs", and the Whitehorse fish ladder. 

There are many opportunities to experience pre-colonial lifestyles by learning about Yukon's First Nations. Wildlife and nature observation is exceptional and a wide variety of large mammals, birds, and fish are easily accessible, whether or not within Yukon's many territorial parks (Herschel Island Qikiqtaruk Territorial Park, Tombstone Territorial Park, Fishing Branch Ni'iinlii'njik Park, Coal River Springs Territorial Park) and national parks (Kluane National Park and Reserve, Vuntut National Park, Ivvavik National Park) and reserves, or nearby Liard River Hot Springs Provincial Park in British Columbia.

The latitude enables the view of aurora borealis in Yukon.

== Arts and culture ==

Although English is the main language used in the territory, as evidenced by the census, the Government of Yukon recognizes several aboriginal languages as part of the cultural heritage of the territory: the Tlingit, and the less common Tahltan, as well as seven Athapaskan languages, Upper Tanana, Gwitchin, Hän, Northern Tutchone, Southern Tutchone, Kaska and Tagish, some of which are rare. Yukon Territory History and Culture, Pinnacle Travel As noted above, the "aboriginal identity population" makes up a relatively small part of the total population, accounting for about 25 percent. Notwithstanding, the aboriginal culture is strongly reflected in such areas as winter sports, as in the Yukon Quest sled dog race. The modern comic-book character Yukon Jack depicts a heroic aboriginal persona. By far the strongest cultural and tourism aspect of the Yukon, however, is the legacy of the Klondike Gold Rush (1897 - 1899), which inspired such contemporary writers at the time as Robert W. Service, Jack London and Jules Verne and which continues to inspire films and games from Mae West's Klondike Annie to The Yukon Trail (see Cultural legacy of the Klondike Gold Rush). Notable residents have included Leslie Nielsen, Erik Nielsen and Pierre Berton.

== Government ==
Chief Isaac of the Hän, Yukon Territory, ca. 1898
In the 19th century Yukon was a segment of North-Western Territory that was administered by the Hudson's Bay Company, and then of the Northwest Territories administered by the federal Canadian government. It only obtained a recognizable local government in 1895 when it became a separate district of the Northwest Territories. Coates and Morrison, p.74 In 1898, it was made a separate territory with its own commissioner and an appointed Territorial Council. Coates and Morrison, p.103 

Prior to 1979, the territory was administered by the commissioner who was appointed by the federal Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development. The commissioner had a role in appointing the territory's Executive Council, served as chair, and had a day-to-day role in governing the territory. The elected Territorial Council had a purely advisory role. In 1979, a significant degree of power was devolved from the commissioner and the federal government to the territorial legislature which, in that year, adopted a party system of responsible government. This change was accomplished through a letter from Jake Epp, the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, rather than through formal legislation.

In preparation for responsible government, political parties were organised and ran candidates to the Yukon Legislative Assembly for the first time in 1978. The Progressive Conservatives won these elections and formed the first party government of Yukon in January 1979. The Yukon New Democratic Party (NDP) formed the government from 1985 to 1992 under Tony Penikett and again from 1996 under Piers McDonald until being defeated in 2000. The conservatives returned to power in 1992 under John Ostashek after having renamed themselves the Yukon Party. The Liberal government of Pat Duncan was defeated in elections in November 2002, with Dennis Fentie of the Yukon Party forming the government as Premier.

The Yukon Act, passed on April 1, 2003, formalised the powers of the Yukon government and devolved additional powers to the territorial government (e.g., control over land and natural resources). As of 2003, other than criminal prosecutions, the Yukon government has much of the same powers as provincial governments, and the other two territories are looking to obtaining the same powers. Today the role of commissioner is analogous to that of a provincial lieutenant governor; however, unlike lieutenant-governors, commissioners are not formal representatives of the Queen but are employees of the federal government.

Although there has been discussion in the past about Yukon becoming Canada's 11th province, it is generally felt that its population base is too sparse for this to occur at present.

At the federal level, the territory is presently represented in the Parliament of Canada by a single Member of Parliament and one senator. Members of Parliament from Canadian territories are full and equal voting representatives and residents of the territory enjoy the same rights as other Canadian citizens. One Yukon Member of Parliament, Erik Nielsen, was the Deputy Prime Minister under the government of Brian Mulroney, while another, Audrey McLaughlin, was the leader of the federal New Democratic Party.

=== Federal representation ===
In the Canadian House of Commons, Yukon is represented by Ryan Leef of the Conservative Party. Leef was first elected to the House of Commons in 2011. Previous Members of Parliament include Larry Bagnell (Liberal Party, 2000–2011), Louise Hardy (New Democratic Party (NDP), 1997–2000), Audrey McLaughlin (NDP, 1987–1997), Erik Nielsen (Progressive Conservative Party, 1957–1987), James Aubrey Simmons (Liberal, 1949–1957).

Yukon is allocated one Senate of Canada seat and has been represented by three Senators since the position was created in 1975. The Senate position is currently held by Daniel Lang, who was appointed on December 22, 2008. It was previously filled by Ione Christensen, of the Liberal Party. Appointed to the Senate in 1999 by Prime Minister Jean Chrétien, Christensen resigned in December 2006 to help her ailing husband. From 1975 to 1999, Paul Lucier (Liberal) served as Senator for Yukon. Lucier was appointed by Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau.

=== First Nations ===

Much of the population of the territory is First Nations. An umbrella land claim agreement representing 7,000 members of 14 different First Nations was signed with the federal government in 1992. Each of the individual First Nations then has to negotiate a specific land claim and a self-government agreement. As of December 2005, 11 of the 14 First Nations had a signed agreement. The 14 First Nations are in the table on the right.

The territory once had an Inuit settlement, located on Herschel Island off the Arctic coast. This settlement was dismantled in 1987 and its inhabitants relocated to the neighbouring Northwest Territories. As a result of the Inuvialuit Final Agreement, the island is now a territorial park and is known officially as Qikiqtaruk Territorial Park, Qikiqtaruk being the name of the island in Inuvialuktun. There are also 14 First Nations that speak eight different languages.

 Government Seat Chief 
 Carcross/Tagish First Nation Carcross Khà Shâde Héni Dan Cresswell 
 Champagne and Aishihik First Nations Haines Junction James Allen 
 First Nation of Nacho Nyak Dun Mayo Simon Mervyn 
 Kluane First Nation Burwash Landing Mathieya Alatini 
 Kwanlin Dün First Nation Whitehorse Rick O'Brien 
 Liard River First Nation Watson Lake Liard McMillan 
 Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation Carmacks Eddie Skookum 
 Ross River Dena Council Ross River Jack Caesar 
 Selkirk First Nation Pelly Crossing Darren Isaac 
 Ta'an Kwach'an Council Whitehorse Brenda Sam 
 Teslin Tlingit Council Teslin Carl Sidney 
 Tr'ondëk Hwëch'in Dawson City Eddie Taylor 
 Vuntut Gwitchin First Nation Old Crow Joe Linklater 
 White River First Nation Beaver Creek David Johnny 

== Infrastructure ==
Dempster Highway, Eagle Plains, road sign
Before modern forms of transportation, the rivers and mountain passes were the main transportation routes for the coastal Tlingit people trading with the Athabascans of which the Chilkoot Pass and Dalton Trail, as well as the first Europeans.

From the Gold Rush until the 1950s, riverboats plied the Yukon River, mostly between Whitehorse and Dawson City, with some making their way further to Alaska and over to the Bering Sea, and other tributaries of Yukon River such as the Stewart River. Most of the riverboats were owned by the British-Yukon Navigation Company, an arm of the White Pass and Yukon Route, which also operated a narrow gauge railway between Skagway, Alaska, and Whitehorse. The railway ceased operation in the 1980s with the first closure of the Faro mine. It is now run during the summer months for the tourism season, with operations as far as Carcross.

Today, major land routes include the Alaska Highway, the Klondike Highway (between Skagway and Dawson City), the Haines Highway (between Haines, Alaska, and Haines Junction), and the Dempster Highway (linking Inuvik, Northwest Territories to the Klondike Highway), all paved except for the Dempster. Other highways with less traffic include the "Robert Campbell Highway" linking Carmacks (on the Klondike Highway) to Watson Lake (Alaska Highway) via Faro and Ross River, and the "Silver Trail" linking the old silver mining communities of Mayo, Elsa and Keno City to the Klondike Highway at the Stewart River bridge. Air travel is the only way to reach the far north community of Old Crow.

Whitehorse International Airport serves as the air transport infrastructure hub, with direct flights to Vancouver, Calgary, Edmonton, Fairbanks, and Frankfurt (summer months). Every Yukon community is served by an airport. The communities of Dawson City, Old Crow, and Inuvik, have regular passenger service through Air North. Air charter businesses exist primarily to serve the tourism and mining exploration industries.

== See also ==

* Canada
** Outline of Canada
** Index of Canada-related articles
** Bibliography of Canada
** 
* History of the west coast of North America
* Peel Watershed
* Yukon College
* Yukon Energy Corporation
* Yukon Field Force
* Yukon Members of Parliament
* Yukon Quest

== References ==

== Further reading ==

* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Yukon Government
* 
* Yukon Attraction & Service Guides
* Immigration Yukon
* University of Washington Libraries: Digital Collections:
* CBC Digital Archives - Territorial Battles: Yukon Elections, 1978-2002

 


