[[Arkansas River]]

The Arkansas River (Pawnee: Kícka ) is a major tributary of the Mississippi River. The Arkansas generally flows to the east and southeast as it traverses the US states of Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Arkansas. The river's initial basin starts in the Western United States in Colorado, specifically the Arkansas River Valley, where the headwaters derive from the snowpack in the Collegiate Peaks. Then it flows east into the Midwest via Kansas, and finally into the South through Oklahoma and Arkansas.

At 1,469 miles (2,364 km), it is the sixth-longest river in the United States, the second-longest tributary in the Mississippi&ndash;Missouri system, and the 45th longest river in the world. Its origin is in the Rocky Mountains in Lake County, Colorado, near Leadville. In 1859, placer gold discovered in the Leadville area brought thousands seeking to strike it rich, but the easily recovered placer gold was quickly exhausted. The Arkansas River's mouth is at Napoleon, Arkansas, and its drainage basin covers nearly 170,000 sq mi (440,300 km²). See watershed maps: 1 In terms of volume, the river is much smaller than both the Missouri and Ohio Rivers, with a mean discharge of roughly 41000 cuft/s.

The Arkansas from its headwaters to the 100th meridian west formed part of the US-Mexico border from the Adams&ndash;Onís Treaty (in force 1821) until the Texas Annexation or Treaty of Guadelupe Hidalgo.

==Pronunciations==
Name pronunciation varies by region. Many people in midwestern states, including Kansas and Colorado, pronounce it , Random House Dictionary 
while many other people in Colorado and Arkansas typically pronounce it according to a state law passed in 1881. 

==Hydrography==
The headwaters of the Arkansas near Leadville, Colorado
The Arkansas has three distinct sections in its long path through central North America. At its headwaters, the Arkansas runs as a steep mountain river through the Rockies in its narrow valley, dropping 4,600 feet (1.4 km) in 120 miles (193 km). This section (including The Numbers near Granite, Colorado, Brown's Canyon, and the Royal Gorge) supports extensive whitewater rafting in the spring and summer.

At Cañon City, Colorado, the Arkansas River valley widens and flattens markedly. Just west of Pueblo, Colorado, the river enters the Great Plains. Through the rest of Colorado, Kansas, and most of Oklahoma, it is a typical Great Plains riverway, with wide, shallow banks subject to seasonal flooding. Tributaries include the Canadian River and the Cimarron River and the Salt Fork Arkansas River.

Other important tributaries flowing into the river as it passes through Oklahoma are the Verdigris, Neosho (Grand), Illinois, and Poteau rivers. O'Dell, Larry. Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture. "Arkansas River. 

The river is navigable by barges and large river craft to Muskogee, Oklahoma because of a series of locks and dams that have been constructed since the early 20th century, the McClellan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System. Above Muskogee, the Arkansas River is navigable only by small craft such as rafts or canoes.

Through western Arkansas, the river valley passes through high, isolated, flat-topped mesas, buttes, or monadnocks, such as Mount Nebo, and Petit Jean Mountain, and Mount Magazine, the highest point in the state. The river valley widens and becomes more shallow just west of Little Rock, Arkansas. It continues eastward across the plains and forests of eastern Arkansas until it flows into the Mississippi River.

Water flow in the Arkansas River (as measured in central Kansas) has dropped from approximately 248 cubic feet per second (7 m³/s) average from 1944-1963 to 53 cubic feet per second (1.5 m³/s) average from 1984–2003, largely because of the pumping of groundwater for irrigation in eastern Colorado and western Kansas.

Important cities along the Arkansas River include Pueblo, Colorado, Wichita, Kansas, Tulsa, Oklahoma, and Fort Smith and Little Rock, Arkansas.

The I-40 Bridge Disaster of May 2002 took place on I-40's crossing of Kerr Reservoir on the Arkansas River near Webbers Falls, Oklahoma.

==Allocation problems==
Since 1902, Kansas has claimed Colorado takes too much of the river's water, resulting in a number of lawsuits before the US Supreme Court that continue to this day, Kansas v. Colorado 514 U.S. 673 (1995), 185 U.S. 125 (1902) generally under the name of Kansas v. Colorado. The problems over the possession and use of Arkansas River water by Colorado and Kansas led to the creation of an interstate compact or agreement between the two states. While Congress approved the Arkansas River Compact in 1949, it did not stop further disputes by the two states over water rights to the river.

The Kansas-Oklahoma Arkansas River Basin Compact was created in 1965 to promote mutual consideration and equity over water use in the basin shared by those states. It led to the Kansas-Oklahoma Arkansas River Commission, which was charged with administering the compact and reducing pollution. The compact was approved and implemented by both states in 1970, and has been in force since then. 

==Riverway commerce==

The McClellan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System begins at the Tulsa Port of Catoosa on the Verdigris River, enters the Arkansas near Muskogee, and runs via an extensive lock and dam system to the Mississippi River.

Through Oklahoma and Arkansas, dams artificially deepen and widen the river to build it into a commercially navigable body of water. From the mouth of the Verdigris, until the McClellan-Kerr system moves over to the White River near Arkansas Post, the Arkansas sustains commercial barge traffic and offers passenger and recreational use and is little more than a series of reservoirs.

==Watershed trails==
Devil's Punch Bowl falls, Grand Canyon of the Arkansas River in Colorado, from Robert N. Dennis collection of stereoscopic views
Many nations of Native Americans lived near, or along, the 1,450-mile (2334-km) stretch of the Arkansas River for thousands of years. The first Europeans to see the river were members of the Spanish Coronado expedition on June 29, 1541. Also in the 1540s, Hernando de Soto discovered the junction of the Arkansas with the Mississippi. The Spanish originally called the river Napeste. "The name "Arkansas" was first applied by Father Jacques Marquette, who called the river Akansa in his journal of 1673.

In 1819, the Adams-Onís Treaty set the Arkansas as part of the frontier between the United States and Spanish Mexico. This continued until the United States annexed Texas after the Mexican-American War, in 1846.

Later, the Santa Fe Trail followed the Arkansas through much of Kansas, except for the Cimarron Cutoff from Cimarron, Kansas, to Cimarron, New Mexico, via Cimarron County, Oklahoma along the Cimarron River.

In the 1880s, Charles "Buffalo" Jones, one of the cofounders of Garden City, Kansas, organized four irrigation companies to take water one hundred miles from the Arkansas River to cultivate 75000 acre of land. Charles Jesse "Buffalo" Jones exhibit, Finney County Historical Museum, Garden City, Kansas 

==Angling==
The headwaters of the Arkansas River, in central Colorado, have been known for exceptional trout fishing, particularly fly fishing, since the 19th century, when greenback cutthroat trout dominated the river. Today, brown trout dominate the river, which also contains rainbow trout. Trout Unlimited considers the Arkansas one of the top 100 trout streams in America, a reputation the river has had since the 1950s. From Leadville to Pueblo, the Arkansas River is serviced by numerous fly shops and guides operating in Buena Vista, Salida, Cañon City and Pueblo. The Colorado Division of Wildlife provides regular online fishing reports for the river. Colorado Division of Wildlife Fishing Reports 

A fish kill occurred on December 29, 2010, in which an estimated 100,000 freshwater drum lined the Arkansas River bank. An investigation, conducted by the Arkansas Game and Fish Commission, found the dead fish "cover 17 miles of river from the Ozark Lock and Dam downstream to River Mile 240, directly south of Hartman, Arkansas." The commission has sampled some of the dead fish and has stated it could take up to 30 days for full test results. Although the cause of death has yet to be determined, state officials have suggested that a disease is the cause. Residents were advised not to eat the fish, as the cause of death remains undetermined. 

==Gallery==

File:Arkansas River in downtown Pueblo, CO IMG_5116.JPG|Arkansas River in downtown Pueblo, Colorado
File:Wichitanightskyline.jpg|Downtown Wichita, Kansas, skyline at night from The Keeper of the Plains at the Arkansas River
File:Arkansas River, Looking Across To North Little Rock 423757092.jpg|Arkansas River, looking across to North Little Rock
File:Dry Arkansas River.jpg|Drought can reduce the Arkansas River so much, trees along the river cannot survive
File:USACE John Martin Dam Arkansas River.jpg|John Martin Dam and Reservoir on the Arkansas River in Bent County, Colorado
File:Kerr-McClellan map.png|Inland waterway system with McClellan-Kerr Navigational Channel shown in red
File:Scouting -Big.jpg|Whitewater kayaking on the Arkansas River
File:Tulsa, Oklahoma.jpg|The Arkansas River in Tulsa, Oklahoma
File:Fly Fishermen on the Arkansas River Near Salida Colorado.jpg|Fly fishermen on the Arkansas River near Salida, Colorado
File:Arkansas_river_salida_co.JPG|Arkansas River in Salida, Colorado
File:Natural landing.jpg|The Arkansas River in Natural Steps, Arkansas
File:Arkansas River at Van Buren, AR.jpg|Arkansas River between Van Buren and Fort Smith, Arkansas

==See also==
* Ackerman Island
* Kansas v. Colorado
* List of crossings of the Arkansas River
* List of longest main-stem rivers in the United States
* Listing of rivers for each state: Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma, Arkansas
* McClellan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System

==References==

==External links==

* Friends of the Arkansas River
* Aquifer saturation map for Equus Beds Aquifer Recharge Project
* Arkansas River Coalition
* Full Scale Map
* Santa Fe Trail Research
* Wichita Water Center Tours
* Animated Map of navigation system
* Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture - Arkansas River
* Oklahoma Digital Maps: Digital Collections of Oklahoma and Indian Territory
* 
* Arkansas River is discussed at the end of this article.
* 

*


