[[Fluorescence]]

Fluorescent minerals emit visible light when exposed to ultraviolet light
Fluorescent marine fishes
Fluorescence is the emission of light by a substance that has absorbed light or other electromagnetic radiation. 
It also occurs when molecules are excited to higher electronic states by energetic electron bombardment, such as occurs, for example, in the natural aurora, high-altitude nuclear explosions, and rocket-borne electron gun experiments. 
 
It is a form of luminescence. In most cases, the emitted light has a longer wavelength, and therefore lower energy, than the absorbed radiation. However, when the absorbed electromagnetic radiation is intense, it is possible for one electron to absorb two photons; this two-photon absorption can lead to emission of radiation having a shorter wavelength than the absorbed radiation. The emitted radiation may also be of the same wavelength as the absorbed radiation, termed "resonance fluorescence". Principles Of Instrumental Analysis F.James Holler, Douglas A. Skoog & Stanley R. Crouch 2006 

The most striking examples of fluorescence occur when the absorbed radiation is in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum, and thus invisible to the human eye, and the emitted light is in the visible region..

Fluorescence has many practical applications, including mineralogy, gemology, chemical sensors (fluorescence spectroscopy), fluorescent labelling, dyes, biological detectors, and, most commonly, fluorescent lamps.

==History==
Lignum nephriticum cup made from the wood of the narra tree (Pterocarpus indicus), and a flask containing its fluorescent solution
Matlaline, the fluorescent substance in the wood of the tree Eysenhardtia polystachya
An early observation of fluorescence was described in 1560 by Bernardino de Sahagún and in 1565 by Nicolás Monardes in the infusion known as lignum nephriticum (Latin for "kidney wood"). It was derived from the wood of two tree species, Pterocarpus indicus and Eysenhardtia polystachya. Available on-line at: Chinese Academy of Science. The chemical compound responsible for this fluorescence is matlaline, which is the oxidation product of one of the flavonoids found in this wood. 

In 1819, Edward D. Clarke Edward Daniel Clarke (1819) "Account of a newly discovered variety of green fluor spar, of very uncommon beauty, and with remarkable properties of colour and phosphorescence," The Annals of Philosophy, 14 : 34 - 36; from page 35: "The finer crystals are perfectly transparent. Their colour by transmitted light is an intense emerald green; but by reflected light, the colour is a deep sapphire blue; … ". and in 1822 René Just Haüy Haüy merely repeats Clarke's observation regarding the colors of the specimen of fluorite which he (Clarke) had examined: Haüy, Traité de Minéralogie, 2nd ed. (Paris, France: Bachelier and Huzard, 1822), vol. 1, page 512. Fluorite is called "chaux fluatée" by Haüy. From page 512: "... violette par réflection, et verdâtre par transparence au Derbyshire." (color of fluorite is violet by reflection, and greenish by transmission in from Derbyshire.) described fluorescence in fluorites, Sir David Brewster described the phenomenon for chlorophyll in 1833 David Brewster (1834) "On the colours of natural bodies," Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 12 : 538-545; on page 542, Brewster mentions that when white light passes through an alcoholic solution of chlorophyll, red light is reflected from it. and Sir John Herschel did the same for quinine in 1845. See:
* Herschel, John (1845a) "On a case of superficial colour presented by a homogeneous liquid internally colourless," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 135 : 143-145; see page 145.
* Herschel, John (1845b) "On the epipŏlic dispersion of light, being a supplement to a paper entitled, "On a case of superficial colour presented by a homogeneous liquid internally colourless" ," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 135 : 147-153. 

In his 1852 paper on the "Refrangibility" (wavelength change) of light, George Gabriel Stokes described the ability of fluorspar and uranium glass to change invisible light beyond the violet end of the visible spectrum into blue light. He named this phenomenon fluorescence : "I am almost inclined to coin a word, and call the appearance fluorescence, from fluor-spar fluorite, as the analogous term opalescence is derived from the name of a mineral." From page 479, footnote: "I am almost inclined to coin a word, and call the appearance fluorescence, from fluor-spar, as the analogous term opalescence is derived from the name of a mineral." The name was derived from the mineral fluorite (calcium difluoride), some examples of which contain traces of divalent europium, which serves as the fluorescent activator to emit blue light. In a key experiment he used a prism to isolate ultraviolet radiation from sunlight and observed blue light emitted by an ethanol solution of quinine exposed by it. Stokes (1852), pages 472-473. In a footnote on page 473, Stokes acknowledges that in 1843, Edmond Becquerel had observed that quinine acid sulfate strongly absorbs ultraviolet radiation (i.e., solar radiation beyond Fraunhofer's H band in the solar spectrum). See: Edmond Becquerel (1843) "Des effets produits sur les corps par les rayons solaires" (On the effects produced on substances by solar rays), Comptes rendus, 17 : 882-884; on page 883, Becquerel cites quinine acid sulfate ("sulfate acide de quinine") as strongly absorbing ultraviolet light. 

==Physical principles==

===Photochemistry===
Fluorescence occurs when an orbital electron of a molecule, atom or nanostructure relaxes to its ground state by emitting a photon of light after being excited to a higher quantum state by some type of energy: 

Excitation: 

Fluorescence (emission): 

here is a generic term for photon energy with h = Planck's constant and = frequency of light. (The specific frequencies of exciting and emitted light are dependent on the particular system.)

State S0 is called the ground state of the fluorophore (fluorescent molecule) and S1 is its first (electronically) excited state.

A molecule, S1, can relax by various competing pathways. It can undergo non-radiative relaxation in which the excitation energy is dissipated as heat (vibrations) to the solvent. Excited organic molecules can also relax via conversion to a triplet state, which may subsequently relax via phosphorescence or by a secondary non-radiative relaxation step.

Relaxation of an S1 state can also occur through interaction with a second molecule through fluorescence quenching. Molecular oxygen (O2) is an extremely efficient quencher of fluorescence just because of its unusual triplet ground state.

Molecules that are excited through light absorption or via a different process (e.g. as the product of a reaction) can transfer energy to a second 'sensitized' molecule, which is converted to its excited state and can then fluoresce. This process is used in lightsticks to produce different colors.

===Quantum yield===
The fluorescence quantum yield gives the efficiency of the fluorescence process. It is defined as the ratio of the number of photons emitted to the number of photons absorbed. Lakowicz, Joseph R. Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy(second edition). Kluwer Academic / Plenum Publishers, 1999 p. 10 Valeur, Bernard, Berberan-Santos, Mario 2012. Molecular Fluorescence: Principles and Applications 2nd ed., Wiley-VCH, p. 64 

: 

The maximum fluorescence quantum yield is 1.0 (100%); each photon absorbed results in a photon emitted. Compounds with quantum yields of 0.10 are still considered quite fluorescent. Another way to define the quantum yield of fluorescence, is by the rate of excited state decay:

: 

where is the rate of spontaneous emission of radiation and

:

is the sum of all rates of excited state decay. Other rates of excited state decay are caused by mechanisms other than photon emission and are, therefore, often called "non-radiative rates", which can include:
dynamic collisional quenching, near-field dipole-dipole interaction (or resonance energy transfer), internal conversion, and intersystem crossing. Thus, if the rate of any pathway changes, both the excited state lifetime and the fluorescence quantum yield will be affected.

Fluorescence quantum yields are measured by comparison to a standard. The quinine salt quinine sulfate in a sulfuric acid solution is a common fluorescence standard.

===Lifetime===
Jablonski diagram. After an electron absorbs a high energy photon the system is excited electronically and vibrationally. The system relaxes vibrationally, and eventually fluoresces at a longer wavelength.

The fluorescence lifetime refers to the average time the molecule stays in its excited state before emitting a photon. Fluorescence typically follows first-order kinetics:

:

where is the concentration of excited state molecules at time , is the initial concentration and