[[Frans Hals]]

Frans Hals the Elder (c. 1582 – 26 August 1666) was a Dutch Golden Age painter born in the Southern Netherlands (present-day Belgium). He is notable for his loose painterly brushwork, and helped introduce this lively style of painting into Dutch art. Hals played an important role in the evolution of 17th-century group portraiture.

==Biography==
Hals was born in 1582 or 1583, in Antwerp as the son of the cloth merchant Franchois Fransz Hals van Mechelen (c.1542–1610) and his second wife Adriaentje van Geertenryck. Frans Hals iat the Netherlands Institute for Art History Like many, Hals' parents fled during the Fall of Antwerp (1584–1585) from the Spanish Netherlands to Haarlem, where he lived for the remainder of his life. Hals studied under another Flemish-émigré, Karel van Mander. Slive, Seymour, Frans Hals, and P. Biesboer (1989). Frans Hals. Munich: Prestel. p. 379. His Mannerist influence, however, is not noticeably visible in his work.

In 1610, Hals became a member of the Haarlem Guild of Saint Luke, and he started to earn money as an art restorer for the city council. He worked on their large art collection that Karel van Mander had described in his Het Schilder-Boeck (Dutch for 'The Book of Painters' or 'The Book of (or on) Painting') published in Haarlem in 1604. The most notable of these were the works of Geertgen tot Sint Jans, Jan van Scorel and Jan Mostaert, that hung in de St. Janskerk in Haarlem. The restoration work was paid for by the city of Haarlem, since all Catholic religious art had been confiscated after the satisfactie van Haarlem, which gave Catholics equal rights to protestants, had been reversed in 1578. However, the entire collection of paintings was not formally possessed by the city council until 1625, after the city fathers had decided which paintings were suitable for the city hall. The remaining art that was considered too "Roman Catholic" was sold to Cornelis Claesz van Wieringen, a fellow guild member, on the condition that he remove it from the city. It was in this cultural context that Hals began his career in portraiture, since the market for religious themes had disappeared.

The earliest known example of Hals' art is the portrait of Jacobus Zaffius (1611). His 'breakthrough' came with the life-size group portrait, The Banquet of the Officers of the St George Militia Company in 1616. His most noted portrait today is the one he made in 1649 of René Descartes.

Statue of Frans Hals in Florapark, Haarlem

Historians have erroneously reported that he mistreated his first wife, Anneke Hermansz (Annetje Harmensdochter Abeel), based on records that a Frans Hals was charged with spousal abuse in Haarlem in 1616. However, as biographer Seymour Slive has pointed out, the Frans Hals in question was not the artist, but another Haarlem resident of the same name. Indeed, at the time of these charges, the artist had no wife to mistreat as Anneke had died in May 1615. Slive, Seymour, Frans Hals, and Pieter Biesboer (1989). Frans Hals. Munich: Prestel. p. 376. Similarly, historical accounts of Hals' propensity for drink have been largely based on embellished anecdotes of his early biographers, namely Arnold Houbraken, with no direct evidence existing documenting such. In 1617, he married Lysbeth Reyniers, the young daughter of a fishmonger that he had taken in to look after his two children. They married in Spaarndam, a small village outside the banns of Haarlem, because she was already 8 months pregnant. Frans Hals was a devoted father and they went on to have eight children. see Hals biography Where Hals contemporaries such as Rembrandt moved their households according to the caprices of patrons, Hals remained in Haarlem and insisted that his customers came to him. According to the Haarlem archives, a militia piece that Hals started in Amsterdam was finished by another painter because Hals refused to paint in Amsterdam, insisting that the militiamen come to Haarlem to sit for their portraits.

Although Hals' work was in demand throughout his life, he lived so long that he eventually went out of style as a painter and experienced financial difficulties. In addition to his painting, he continued throughout his life to work as a restorer, art dealer, and art tax expert for the city councilors. His creditors took him to court several times, and to settle his debt with a baker in 1652 he sold his belongings. The inventory of the property seized mentions only three mattresses and bolsters, an armoire, a table and five pictures (these were by himself, his sons, van Mander, and Maarten van Heemskerck). Slive, Seymour, Frans Hals, and P. Biesboer (1989). Frans Hals. Munich: Prestel. p. 406. Left destitute, he was given an annuity of 200 florins in 1664 by the municipality.

At a time when the Dutch nation fought for independence during the Eighty Years' War, Hals was a member of the locL schutterij, a military guild. This information discovered in the Haarlem archives has led to speculation that Hals included a self-portrait in his 1639 painting of the St. Joris company. It has not been possible to confirm this. It was not common for ordinary members to be painted as that privilege was reserved for the officers. Frans Hals painted the company three times. Hals was also a member of a local chamber of rhetoric, and in 1644 he became chairman of the Guild of St. Luke.

Frans Hals died in Haarlem in 1666 and was buried in the city's St. Bavo Church. His widow later died obscurely in the local almshouse after seeking outdoor relief from the guardians of the poor.

==Artistic career==
Frans Hals, later finished by Pieter Codde. De Magere Compagnie. 1637. Oil on canvas, 209 x 429 cm, Rijksmuseum Amsterdam
Hals is best known for his portraits, mainly of wealthy citizens, like Pieter van den Broecke and Isaac Massa, whom he painted three times. He also painted large group portraits, for local civic guards and for the regents of local hospitals. He was a Dutch Golden Age painter who practiced an intimate realism with a radically free approach. His pictures illustrate the various strata of society; banquets or meetings of officers, guildsmen, local councilmen from mayors to clerks, itinerant players and singers, gentlefolk, fishwives and tavern heroes. In his group portraits, such as The Banquet of the Officers of the St Adrian Militia Company in 1627, Hals captures each character in a different manner. The faces are not idealized and are clearly distinguishable, with their personalities revealed in a variety of poses and facial expressions.

Hals was fond of daylight and silvery sheen, while Rembrandt used golden glow effects based upon artificial contrasts of low light in immeasurable gloom. Both men were painters of touch, but of touch on different keys &mdash; Rembrandt was the bass, Hals the treble. Hals seized, with rare intuition, a moment in the life of his subjects. What nature displayed in that moment he reproduced thoroughly in a delicate scale of color, and with mastery over every form of expression. He became so clever that exact tone, light and shade, and modeling were obtained with a few marked and fluid strokes of the brush. He became a popular portrait painter, and painted the wealthy of Haarlem on special occasions. He won many commissions for wedding portraits (the husband is traditionally situated on the left, and the wife situated on the right). His double portrait of the newly married Olycans hang side by side in the Mauritshuis, but many of his wedding portrait pairs have since been split up and are rarely seen together.

==Wedding portraits==

File:Frans Hals - Portrait de Jacob Pietersz Olycan.jpg|Portrait of Jacob Pietersz Olycan (1596-1638), 1625, Mauritshuis.
File:Frans_Hals_-_Portrait_d'Aletta_Hanemans.jpg|Portrait of Aletta Hanemans (1606-1653), bride of Jacob Olycan, 1625, Mauritshuis.
File:Frans Hals - Paulus Beresteyn, rechter te Haarlem.jpg|Paulus van Beresteyn, 1629, Louvre.
File:Paulus van Beresteyns vrouw Catharina Both van der Eem.jpg|Catharina Both van der Eem, bride of Paulus Beresteyn, 1629, Louvre.
File:Frans Hals 1644 Portrait of Joseph Coymans.jpg|Joseph Coymans (1591-1660), the husband of Dorothea Berck, 1644, Wadsworth Atheneum.
File:Dorothea Berck door Frans Hals in 1644.jpg|Dorothea Berck (1593-1684), wife of Joseph Coymans, 1644, Private Collection.
File:Frans Hals 038.jpg|Portrait of Stephan Geraedts, husband of Isabella Coymans, 1652,Royal Museum of Fine Arts, Antwerp.
File:Frans Hals - Portrait d'Isabella Coymans.jpg|Isabella Coymans, wife of Stephan Geraedts, 1652, Private Collection.

The only record of his work in the first decade of his independent activity is an engraving by Jan van de Velde copied from the lost portrait of The Minister Johannes Bogardus. Early works by Hals, such as Two Boys Playing and Singing and the aforementioned Banquet of the Officers of the St George Militia (1616), show him as a careful draughtsman capable of great finish, yet spirited withal. The flesh he painted is pastose and burnished, less clear than it subsequently became. Later, he became more effective, displayed more freedom of hand, and a greater command of effect.
Jester with a Lute, 1620&ndash;1625, canvas, Musée du Louvre, Paris.
During this period he painted the full-length portrait of Madame van Beresteyn (Louvre), and a full-length portrait of Willem van Heythuyzen leaning on a sword. Both these pictures are equalled by the other Banquet of the Officers of the St George Militia (with different portraits) and the same militia in 1627 and Banquet of the Officers of the St Hadrian Militia of 1633. A similar painting, with the date of 1639, suggests some study of Rembrandt masterpieces, and a similar influence is apparent in a group portrait of 1641 representing the regents of the St. Elisabeth Gasthuis, and in his 1639 portrait of Maria Voogt at Amsterdam.

From 1620 till 1640 he painted many double portraits of married couples, on separate panels, the man on the left panel, his wife at his right. Only once did Hals portray a couple on a single canvas: Couple in a garden: Wedding portrait of Isaac Abrahamsz. Massa and Beatrix van der Laan, (c. 1622, Rijksmuseum Amsterdam).

His style changed throughout his life. Paintings of vivid color were gradually replaced by pieces where one color dominated: black. This was probably due to the sober dress of his Protestant sitters, more than any personal preference. One simple way to observe this change is to look at all of the portraits he painted through the years with his trademark-pose leaning over the back of a chair:

:Image:Portrait of Isaac Abrahamsz. Massa by Frans Hals.png|1626
:Image:Frans Hals - Oficial Sentado.jpg| 1631
:Image:Frans Hals 037.jpg|1633
:Image:Willem Heythuijsen by Frans Hals 1634.jpg|1634
:Image:Frans Hals 035.jpg|1635
:Image:Frans Hals, Willem Coymans, 1645.jpg|1645
:Image:Frans Hals 066.jpg|1645
:Image:Frans Hals - Frans Post (Worcester Art Museum).jpg|1655
:Image:Frans Hals 068.jpg|1665

Later in his life his brush strokes became looser, fine detail becoming less important than the overall impression. Where his earlier pieces radiated gaiety and liveliness, his later portraits emphasized the stature and dignity of the people portrayed. This austerity is displayed in Regents of the St Elizabeth Hospital in 1641, and two decades later, The Regents and Regentesses of the Oudemannenhuis (c. 1664), which are masterpieces of color, though in substance all but monochromes. His restricted palette is particularly noticeable in his flesh tints, which from year to year became more grey, until finally the shadows were painted in almost absolute black, as in the Tymane Oosdorp.

As this tendency coincides with the period that he was less popular among the wealthy, some historians have suggested that a reason for his predilection for black and white pigment was the low price of these colors as compared with the costly lakes and carmines. Both conclusions are probably correct, however, because unlike his contemporaries, Hals did not travel to his sitters, but let them come to him. This was good for business because he was exceptionally quick and efficient in his own well-fitted studio, but it was bad for business when Haarlem fell on hard times.

As a portrait painter Hals had scarcely the psychological insight of a Rembrandt or Velázquez, though in a few works, like the Admiral de Ruyter, the Jacob Olycan, and the Albert van der Meer paintings, he reveals a searching analysis of character which has little in common with the instantaneous expression of his so-called character portraits. In these, he generally sets upon the canvas the fleeting aspect of the various stages of merriment, from the subtle, half ironic smile that quivers round the lips of the curiously misnamed Laughing Cavalier to the imbecile grin of the Malle Babbe. To this group of pictures belong Baron Gustav Rothschilds Jester, the Bohemienne and the Fisher Boy, whilst the Portrait of the Artist with his Second Wife, and the somewhat confused group of the Beresteyn Family at the Louvre show a similar tendency. Far less scattered in arrangement than this Beresteyn group, and in every respect one of the most masterly of Hals' achievements is the group called The Painter and his Family, which was almost unknown until it appeared at the winter exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1906.

Many of Hals' works have disappeared, but it is not known how many. According to the most authoritative present day catalogue, compiled by Seymour Slive in 1970-1974 (Slive's last great Hals exhibition catalogue followed in 1989), another 222 paintings can be ascribed to Hals. Another authority on Hals, Claus Grimm, believes this number to be lower (145) in his Frans Hals. Das Gesamtwerk (1989).

It is not known whether Hals ever painted landscapes, still lifes or narrative pieces, but it is unlikely. His debut for Haarlem society in 1616 with his large group portrait for the St. George militia shows all three disciplines, but if that painting was his signboard for future commissions, it seems he was subsequently only hired for portraits. Many artists in the 17th century in Holland opted to specialise, and Hals also appears to have been a pure portrait specialist.

==Painting technique==

Frans Hals. Gypsy Girl. 1628-30. Oil on wood, 58 x 52 cm. Musée du Louvre, Paris.
Hals was a master of a technique that utilized something previously seen as a flaw in painting, the visible brushstroke. The soft curling lines of Hals' brush are always clear upon the surface: "materially just lying there, flat, while conjuring substance and space in the eye." 

Lively and exciting, the technique can appear "ostensibly slapdash" – people often think that Hals 'threw' his works 'in one toss' (aus einem Guss) onto the canvas. This impression is not correct. True, the odd work was largely put down without underdrawings or underpainting ('alla prima'), but most of the works were created in successive layers, as was customary at that time. Sometimes a drawing was made with chalk or paint on top of a grey or pink undercoat, and was then more or less filled in, in stages. It does seem that Hals usually applied his underpainting very loosely: he was a virtuoso from the beginning. This applies, of course, particularly to his genre works and his somewhat later, mature works. Hals displayed tremendous daring, great courage and virtuosity, and had a great capacity to pull back his hands from the canvas, or panel, at the moment of the most telling statement. He didn't 'paint them to death', as many of his contemporaries did, in their great accuracy and diligence whether requested by their clients or not.

In the 17th century his first biographer, Schrevelius wrote: "An unusual manner of painting, all his own, surpassing almost everyone," on Hals' painting methods. For that matter, schematic painting was not Hals' own idea (the approach already existed in 16th century Italy), and Hals was probably inspired by Flemish contemporaries, Rubens and Van Dyck, in his painting method.

As early as the 17th century, people were struck by the vitality of Frans Hals' portraits. For example, Haarlem resident Theodorus Schrevelius noted that Hals' works reflected 'such power and life' that the painter 'seems to challenge nature with his brush'. Centuries later Vincent van Gogh wrote to his brother Theo: 'What a joy it is to see a Frans Hals, how different it is from the paintings – so many of them – where everything is carefully smoothed out in the same manner.' Hals chose not to give a smooth finish to his painting, as most of his contemporaries did, but mimicked the vitality of his subject by using smears, lines, spots, large patches of color and hardly any details.

It was not until the 19th century that his technique had followers, particularly among the Impressionists. Pieces such as The Regentesses of the Old Men's Alms House and the civic guard paintings demonstrate this technique to the fullest.

==Influence==
Laughing Cavalier, 1624, canvas, relined, (H) 83cm x (W) 67cm, Wallace Collection, London.

Frans influenced his brother Dirck Hals (born at Haarlem, 1591–1656), who was also a painter. Encyclopædia Britannica 1911 quote: "Quite in another form, and with much of the freedom of the elder Hals, Dirk Hals, his brother, painted festivals and ballrooms. But Dirk had too much of the freedom and too little of the skill in drawing which characterized his brother." Additionally, five of his sons became painters:
*Harmen Hals (1611&ndash;1669)
*Frans Hals Junior (1618&ndash;1669)
*Jan Hals (1620&ndash;1654)
*Reynier Hals (1627&ndash;1672)
*Nicolaes Hals (1628&ndash;1686)

Though most of his sons became portrait painters, some of them took up still life painting or architectural studies and landscapes. Still lifes formerly attributed to his son Frans II have since been re-attributed to other painters, however. Encyclopædia Britannica 1911 quote: "Of the master's numerous family members only Frans Hals the Younger (1618&ndash;1669) is notable, with paintings of cottages and poultry. A table laden with gold and silver dishes, cups, glasses and books, is considered one of his finest works." Frans Hals painted a young woman reaching into a basket in a still life market scene by Claes van Heussen. Young woman with a display of fruit and vegetables in the RKD 

Other contemporary painters who took inspiration from Frans Hals were:
*Jan Miense Molenaer (1609&ndash;1668), Haarlem
*Judith Leyster (wife of Molenaer) (1609&ndash;1660), Haarlem
*Adriaen van Ostade (1610&ndash;1685), Haarlem
*Adriaen Brouwer (1605&ndash;1638), South Low Countries
*Johannes Cornelisz Verspronck (1597&ndash;1662), Haarlem
*Bartholomeus van der Helst (1613&ndash;1670), Amsterdam
*Cornelis de Bie (1621–1664), Amsterdam
Hals had a large workshop in Haarlem and many students, though 19th century biographers questioned some of his pupils, since their painting styles were so dissimilar to Hals. In his De Groote Schouburgh (1718–21), Arnold Houbraken mentions Philips Wouwerman, Adriaen Brouwer, Pieter Gerritsz van Roestraten, Adriaen van Ostade and Dirck van Delen as students. Vincent Laurensz van der Vinne was also a student, according to his diary with notes left by his son Laurens Vincentsz van der Vinne. Roestraten was not only a student (the Haarlem archives contain a notarised document, which supports this fact), but he also became a son-in-law of Hals when he married his daughter Adriaentje. The Haarlem portrait painter, Johannes Verspronck, one of about 10 competing portraitists in Haarlem at the time, possibly studied for some time with Hals.

In terms of style, the closest to Hals' work is the handful of paintings that are ascribed to Judith Leyster, which she often signed. She also 'qualifies' as a possible student, as does her husband, the painter Jan Miense Molenaer.

Two centuries after his death, Hals received a number of 'posthumous' students. Claude Monet, Édouard Manet, Charles-François Daubigny, Max Liebermann, James Abbott McNeill Whistler, Gustave Courbet, and in the Netherlands, Jacobus van Looy and Isaac Israëls are some of the Impressionists and realists who have delved deeply into the work of Hals by making study copies of his work and further building on his techniques and style. Lovis Corinth named Hals as his biggest influence Lovis Corinth A Feast of Painting, p17, Prestel, Vienna, 2009 ISBN 978-3-901508-4378-5 Many artists travelled to the Frans Hals Museum in Haarlem (since 1913 on the Groot Heiligland, and before that in the Town Hall), where several of his most important works are kept.

==Legacy==
Malle Babbe, c.1630. Oil on canvas, 75cm by 64cm. Staatliche Museen, Berlin.
Hals' reputation waned after his death and for two centuries he was held in such poor esteem that some of his paintings, which are now among the proudest possessions of public galleries, were sold at auction for a few pounds or even shillings. The portrait of Johannes Acronius realized five shillings at the Enschede sale in 1786. The portrait of the man with the sword at the Liechtenstein gallery sold in 1800 for 4, 5s.

Starting at the middle of the 1860s his prestige rose again thanks to the efforts of critic Théophile Thoré-Bürger. Johnson, Paul. Art: A New History, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2003, p.369 With his rehabilitation in public esteem came the enormous rise in value, and, at the Secretan sale in 1889, the portrait of Pieter van den Broecke was bid up to 4,420 francs, while in 1908 the National Gallery paid 25,000 pounds for the large family group from the collection of Lord Talbot de Malahide.

Hals' work remains popular today, particularly with young painters who can find many lessons about practical technique from his unconcealed brushstrokes. Hals' works have found their way to countless cities all over the world and into museum collections. From the late 19th century, they were collected everywhere — from Antwerp to Toronto, and from London to New York. Many of his paintings were then sold to American collectors.

A primary collection of his work is displayed in the Frans Hals Museum in Haarlem.
 
A crater on Mercury is named in his honor.

Hals was pictured on the Netherlands' 10-guilder banknote of 1968. 

File:Frans Hals 013.jpg|Banquet of the Officers of the St George Civic Guard, 1627
File:Frans Hals - Portret van Catharina Hooft en haar min.jpg|Catharina Hooft with her Nurse, c. 1619-1620
File:Family_Portrait_in_a_Landscape_WGA.jpg|Family Portrait in a Landscape, c. 1620
File:Frans Hals - Three Children with a Goat Cart - WGA11064.jpg|Three Children with a Goat Cart, c. 1620
File:Hals_Frans_Portrait_Of_A_Man.jpg|Portrait Of A Man, 1630
File:Zaffius jacobus 1611.JPG|Jacobus Zaffius, 1611
File:Jonker_Ramp_and_his_Sweetheart_WGA.jpg|Jonker Ramp and his Sweetheart, 1623
File:Frans Hals 056.jpg|Married Couple in a Garden, 1622
File:Peeckelhaering_WGA.jpg|Peeckelhaering, c. 1628-1630
File:Frans_Hals_003.jpg|The Mulatto, 1627
File:Frans Hals - Portrait of a Man Holding a Skull.JPG|Portrait of a Man Holding a Skull, c.1615
File:Frans Hals, Young Man with a Skull (Vanitas).JPG|Youth with a Skull, c. 1626-1628, National Gallery, London
File:Portrait of a Woman00.jpg|Portrait of a Woman, 1644
File:Frans Hals 002b.gif|The Jolly Drinker, c. 1628-1630
File:Shrovetide_Revellers_WGA.jpg|Shrovetide Revellers, c. 1615
File:Frans Hals 084 WGA version.jpg|St. Matthew, c. 1625
File:Frans Hals - The Rommel Pot Player - WGA11057.jpg|The Rommel Pot Player, c.1618-1622
File:Two_Boys_Singing_WGA.jpg|Two Boys Singing, c. 1625
File:Frans Hals 014.jpg|Assembly of Officers and Subalterns of the Civic Guard / Archers of St. Adrian, 1633
File:Frans Hals 031.jpg|Portrait of Isaak Abrahamsz. Massa, 1626
File:Frans Hals t e Aken.JPG|Daniel van Aken
File:Frans Hals 001.png|Boy with a lute c. 1625 The Metropolitan Museum of Art
File:Frans Hals - Regents of the St Elizabeth Hospital of Haarlem - WGA11139.jpg|Regents of the St Elizabeth Hospital of Haarlem, 1641
File:Frans_Hals_111_WGA_version.jpg|Portrait of René Descartes, circa 1649

==See also==
*List of paintings by Frans Hals
*Han van Meegeren

==References and sources==
;References

;Sources

* Frans Hals biography in De groote schouburgh der Nederlantsche konstschilders en schilderessen (1718) by Arnold Houbraken, courtesy of the Digital library for Dutch literature

*Seymour Slive: Frans Hals, 3 Volumes (oeuvre catalogue), New York / London 1970–1974
*Frans Hals (exhibition catalogue Washington/London/Haarlem, 1989.
*Claus Grimm published his Frans Hals. Das Gesamtwerk in 1989 (Stuttgart/Zürich; also translated into Dutch and English).
*N. Middelkoop and A. van Grevenstein, Frans Hals. Leven, werk, restauratie (Life, work and restorations) (Haarlem Amsterdam 1988). This work gives an account of restorations of the riflemen's pieces, but it also gives a picture of Hals' life and work.
*Antoon Erftemeijer; 2004 : Frans Hals in het Frans Hals Museum, Amsterdam/Gent (in Dutch, English and French), in which various chapters are devoted to Hals' life, his predecessors, portrait painting in the Golden Age, Hals' painting technique and other subjects. Many pictures with close-ups in this book show Hals' works in great detail.
*Christopher Atkins (2004) Frans Hals's Virtuoso Brushwork, Nederlands Kunsthistorisch Jaarboek 2003, Zwolle, p. 281-309).

Parts of this article are excerpts of The Frans Hals Museum, Haarlem, July 2005 by Antoon Erftemeijer, Frans Hals Museum curator.

==External links==

*27 
*Frans Hals Museum in Haarlem
*Frans Hals Works, Biography and Style
*The National Gallery
*The Wallace Collection
*Web Gallery of Art (large collection of pictures and extensive biography)
*Frans Hals at zeno.org 
*Olga's Gallery
*Works and literature on Frans Hals
* Walter Liedtke,"Frans Hals: Style and Substance" (Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2011)

 
