[[Glottal stop]]

The glottal stop is a type of consonantal sound used in many spoken languages, produced by obstructing airflow in the vocal tract or, more precisely, the glottis. The symbol in the International Phonetic Alphabet that represents this sound is .

In English, the glottal stop is represented, for example, by the hyphen in uh-oh!. For most English speakers, a glottal stop is used as an allophone of between a vowel and a syllabic "n", as in button or mountain, except when talking slowly.

==Features==
Features of the glottal stop:

* Its phonation is voiceless, which means it is produced without vibration of the vocal cords; necessarily so, because the vocal cords are held tightly together, preventing vibration.

==Phonology and symbolization of the glottal stop in selected languages==
Although this segment is not a written phoneme in English, it is present phonetically in nearly all dialects of English as an allophone of in the syllable coda. Speakers of Cockney, Scottish English and several other British dialects also pronounce an intervocalic between vowels as in city. Standard English inserts a glottal stop before a tautosyllabic voiceless stop, e.g. sto’p, tha’t, kno’ck, wa’tch, also lea’p, soa’k, hel’p, pin’ch. Brown, Gillian. 1977:27. Listening to spoken English. London: Longman. 

In many languages that don't allow a sequence of vowels, such as Persian, the glottal stop may be used to break up such a hiatus. There are intricate interactions between falling tone and the glottal stop in the histories of such languages as Danish (cf. stød), Chinese and Thai.

In the traditional Romanization of many languages, such as Arabic, the glottal stop is transcribed with an apostrophe, , and this is the source of the IPA character . In many Polynesian languages that use the Latin alphabet, however, the glottal stop is written with a reversed apostrophe, (called ‘okina in Hawaiian and Samoan), which, confusingly, is also used to transcribe the Arabic ayin and is the source of the IPA character for the voiced pharyngeal fricative . In Malay the glottal stop is represented by the letter , in Võro and Maltese by .Road sign in British Columbia showing the use of 7 instead of ʔ in the Squamish language.

Other scripts also have letters used for representing the glottal stop, such as the Hebrew letter aleph , and the Cyrillic letter palochka used in several Caucasian languages. In Tundra Nenets it is represented by the letters apostrophe and double apostrophe . In Japanese, glottal stops occur at the end of interjections of surprise or anger, and are represented by the character .

In the graphic representation of most Philippine languages, the glottal stop has no consistent symbolization. In most cases, however, a word that begins with a vowel-letter (e.g. Tagalog aso, "dog") is always pronounced with an unrepresented glottal stop before that vowel (as also in Modern German and Hausa). Some orthographies employ a hyphen, instead of the reverse apostrophe, if the glottal stop occurs in the middle of the word (e.g. Tagalog pag-ibig, "love"; or Visayan gabi-i, "night"). When it occurs in the end of a Tagalog word, the last vowel is written with a circumflex accent (known as the pakupyâ), if both a stress and a glottal stop occurs at the final vowel (e.g. basâ, "wet"); or a grave accent (known as the paiwà), if the glottal stop occurs at the final vowel, but the stress occurs at the penultimate syllable (e.g. batà, "child"). 

Some Canadian indigenous languages have adopted the phonetic symbol "ʔ" itself as part of their orthographies. In some of them, it occurs as a pair of uppercase and lowercase characters, stop (letter)|]. Sometimes the number symbol 7 is used if the ʔ character is not available to the typesetter, and in some cases such as in the Squamish language, the 7 has become the preferred symbol.

Use of the glottal stop is a distinct characteristic of the Southern Mainland Argyll dialects of Scottish Gaelic. In a such a dialect, the standard Gaelic phrase Tha Gàidhlig agam (I have Gaelic), would be rendered Tha Gàidhlig a'am.

==Occurrence==

 Language Word IPA Meaning Notes 
 Abkhaz 'no' See Abkhaz phonology. 
 Adyghe 'arm/hand' 
 Arabic Standard 'songs' See Arabic phonology, Hamza. 
 Metropolitan 'apartment' Metropolitan dialects including Egyptian Arabic. Corresponds to in Literary Arabic. 
 Bikol 'new' 
 Burmese 'rivers' 
 Cebuano 'to grow' 
 Chamorro 'shark' 
 Chechen / 'three' 
 Chinese Cantonese 'love' See Cantonese phonology. 
 Wu 'superb' 
 Chintang 'water' 
 Czech 'to use' See Czech phonology. 
 Danish 'hand' See Danish phonology. 
 Dutch 'to confirm' See Dutch phonology. 
 English Australian 'cat' Allophone of . See glottalization and English phonology. 
 GA 
 Estuary 
 Cockney 
 RP and GA button 'button' 
 Esperanto 'to know' See Esperanto phonology. 
 Finnish 'bus' See Finnish phonology. 
 German Northern 'civil servant' See German phonology. 
 Western 'management' 
 Guaraní 'Guaraní' Occurs only between vowels. 
 Hawaiian 'black' See Hawaiian phonology. 
 Hebrew 'article' See Modern Hebrew phonology. 
 Icelandic 'but' Only used according to emphasis, never occurring in minimal pairs. 
 Javanese 'child' Allophone of in morpheme-final position. 
 Indonesian 'meatball' Allophone of or in the syllable coda. 
 Ilocano 'rich' Allophone of in the syllable coda. 
 Kabardian 'arm/hand' 
 Kagayanen 'floor' 
 Korean 'one' In free variation with no glottal stop. Occurs only in initial position of word. 
 Malay 'no' Allophone of final in the syllable coda, pronounced before consonants or at end of word. 
 Maltese 'cat' 
 Nahuatl 'father' Often left unwritten. 
 Nez Perce 'black bear' 
 Nheengatu Fonologia e Gramática do Nheengatu – A língua geral falada pelos povos Baré, Warekena e Baniwa 'sloth' Transcription (or absence thereof) varies. 
 Persian 'meaning' See Persian phonology. 
 Pirahã 'parent' 
 Portuguese O Arquivo Dialetal do CLUP: disponibilização on-line de um corpus dialetal do português Vernacular Brazilian Phonetic symbols for Portuguese phonetic transcription In European Portuguese, the \"é é\" interjection usually employs an epenthetic , being pronounced instead. ironic 'yeah, right!' It may be used mostly as a general call of attention for disapproval, disagreement or inconsistency, but also serves as a synonym of the multiuse expression \"eu, hein!\". How to say 'eu, hein' in English – Adir Ferreira Idiomas Marginal sound. Does not occur after or before a consonant. In Brazilian casual speech, there is at least one –vowel length–pitch accent minimal pair (triply unusual, the ideophones short vs long ). See Portuguese phonology. 
 Some speakers 'to the class' 
 Rotuman 'to box' 
 Samoan 'sickness, illness' 
 Seri 'I' 
 Spanish Nicaraguan The hypo-hyperarticulation continuum in Nicaraguan Spanish 'higher' Marginal sound or allophone of between vowels in different words. Does not occur after or before a consonant. See Spanish phonology. 
 Yucateco Voiceless stop aspiration in Yucatán Spanish: a sociolinguistic analysis 'four years' 
 Tagalog 'will urinate' See Tagalog phonology. 
 Tahitian pua'a 'pig' 
 Thai อา 'uncle'/'aunt' (father's younger sibling) 
 Tongan tuu 'stand' 
 Tundra Nenets 'tundra' 
 Vietnamese 'sultry' In free variation with no glottal stop. See Vietnamese phonology. 
 Võro piniq 'dogs' \"q\" is Võro plural marker (maa, kala, \"land\", \"fish\"; maaq, kalaq, \"lands\", \"fishes\"). 
 Wagiman jamh ] 
 Wallisian ma'uli 'life' 
 Welayta 'wet' 

==See also==
* Stød in Danish
* Saltillo
* Hamza in Arabic
* T-glottalization in English
* Vocal hiccup
* Index of phonetics articles

==References==

==Bibliography==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


