[[Hydrogen peroxide]]

Hydrogen peroxide is a chemical compound with the formula (). It is the simplest peroxide (a compound with an oxygen-oxygen single bond) and in its pure form is a colorless liquid, slightly more viscous than water. For safety reasons it is normally encountered as an aqueous solution, also colorless. Hydrogen peroxide is a strong oxidizer and is used as a bleaching agent and disinfectant. Concentrated hydrogen peroxide, or 'high-test peroxide' is a reactive oxygen species and has been used as a propellant in rocketry. 

Organisms naturally produce trace quantities of hydrogen peroxide, most notably by a respiratory burst as part of the immune response.

==Structure and properties==

===Properties===
The boiling point of has been extrapolated as being 150.2 °C, however, in practice hydrogen peroxide will undergo potentially explosive thermal decomposition if heated to this temperature. It may be safely distilled under reduced pressure via a variety of techniques. 

====In aqueous solutions====
In aqueous solutions hydrogen peroxide differs from the pure material due to the effects of hydrogen bonding between water and hydrogen peroxide molecules. Hydrogen peroxide and water form a eutectic mixture, exhibiting freezing-point depression; pure water has a melting point of 0°C and pure hydrogen peroxide of −0.43 °C, but a 50% (by volume) solution of the 2 freezes at -51°C. The boiling point of the same mixture is also depressed in relation with the median of both boiling points (125.1°C). It occurs at 114°C, This is 14 more than pure water and 36.2 less than pure hydrogen peroxide boiling point. 60% hydrogen peroxide msds 50% H2O2 MSDS 

Phase diagram of and water: Area above blue line is liquid. Dotted lines separate solid+liquid phases from solid+solid phases.

 Density of aqueous solution of H2O2 
 H2O2 (v/v) Density (g/cm3) Temperature (°C) 
 3% 1.0095 15 
 27% 1.10 20 
 35% 1.13 20 
 50% 1.20 20 
 70% 1.29 20 
 75% 1.33 20 
 96% 1.42 20 
 98% 1.43 20 
 100% 1.450 20 

===Structure===

Hydrogen peroxide (), is a nonplanar molecule possessing (twisted) C2 symmetry. Although the O−O bond is a single bond, the molecule has a relatively high barrier to rotation of 2460 cm-1 (29.45 kJ/mol); for comparison, the rotational barrier for ethane is 12.5 kJ/mol. The increased barrier is ascribed to repulsion between the lone pairs of the adjacent oxygen atoms and results in hydrogen peroxide displaying atropisomerism.

The molecular structures of gaseous and crystalline are significantly different. This is largely due to the effects of hydrogen bonding, which is absent in the gaseous state, as the molecules in gasses are too far apart. Crystals of are tetragonal with the space group . 
 

 Properties of H2O2 and its analogues values marked * are extrapolated 
 Name Formular Molar mass (g mol−1) Mpt (°C) Bpt (°C) 
 Hydrogen peroxide HOOH 34.01 −0.43 150.2* 
 Hydrogen disulfide HSSH 66.15 −89.6 70.7 
 Hydrazine H2NNH2 32.05 2 114 
 Hydroxylamine NH2OH 33.03 33 58* 
 Diphosphane H2PPH2 65.98 −99 63.5* 

===Comparison with analogues===
Hydrogen peroxide has a number of structural analogues of which hydrogen disulfide is perhaps the most closely related. It has the highest (theoretical) boiling point of all the analogues. Its melting point is also fairly high, being comparable to that of hydrazine, with only hydroxylamine crystallising significantly more readily. This indicates the presence of particularly strong hydrogen bonding. All of the analogues are thermodynamically unstable, particularly upon heating, with hydrazine and hydroxylamine being potentially explosive. Diphosphane is unique in being pyrophoric and is the most difficult of the analogues to synthesise. Structurally, the analogues all adopt similar skewed structures, due to repulsion between adjacent lone pairs.

==Discovery==
Hydrogen peroxide was first described in 1818 by Louis Jacques Thénard, who produced it by treating barium peroxide with nitric acid. An improved version of this process used hydrochloric acid, followed by addition of sulfuric acid to precipitate the barium sulfate byproduct. Thénard's process was used from the end of the 19th century until the middle of the 20th century. C. W. Jones, J. H. Clark. Applications of Hydrogen Peroxide and Derivatives. Royal Society of Chemistry, 1999. 

Pure hydrogen peroxide was long believed to be unstable as early attempts to separate it from the water, which is present during synthesis, all failed. However, this instability was due to traces of impurities (transition metals salts) which catalyze the decomposition of the hydrogen peroxide. Pure hydrogen peroxide was first obtained 80 years after its discovery by Richard Wolffenstein, who produced it via vacuum distillation. At the end of the 19th century, Petre Melikishvili and his pupil L. Pizarjevski showed that of the many proposed formulas of hydrogen peroxide, the correct one was H−O−O−H.

==Manufacture==
Previously, hydrogen peroxide has been prepared industrially by hydrolysis of the ammonium peroxydisulfate, which was itself obtained via the electrolysis of a solution of ammonium bisulfate () in sulfuric acid.
:(NH4)2S2O8 + 2 H2O → H2O2 + 2 (NH4)HSO4

Today, hydrogen peroxide is manufactured almost exclusively by the anthraquinone process, which was formalized in 1936 and patented in 1939. It begins with the reduction of an anthraquinone (such as 2-ethylanthraquinone or the 2-amyl derivative) to the corresponding anthrahydroquinone, typically via hydrogenation on a palladium catalyst; the anthrahydroquinone then undergoes to autoxidation to regenerate the starting anthraquinone, with hydrogen peroxide being produced as a by-product. Most commercial processes achieve oxidation by bubbling compressed air through a solution of the derivatized anthracene, whereby the oxygen present in the air reacts with the labile hydrogen atoms (of the hydroxy group), giving hydrogen peroxide and regenerating the anthraquinone. Hydrogen peroxide is then extracted and the anthraquinone derivative is reduced back to the dihydroxy (anthracene) compound using hydrogen gas in the presence of a metal catalyst. The cycle then repeats itself. H. Riedl and G. Pfleiderer, U.S. Patent 2,158,525 (2 October 1936 in USA, and 10 October 1935 in Germany) to I. G. Farbenindustrie, Germany 

Hydrogen peroxide production with the Riedl-Pfleiderer process

The simplified overall equation for the process is deceptively simple: 
: + → 

The economics of the process depend heavily on effective recycling of the quinone (which is expensive) and extraction solvents, and of the hydrogenation catalyst.

A process to produce hydrogen peroxide directly from the elements has been of interest for many years. Direct synthesis is difficult to achieve as, in terms of thermodynamics, the reaction of hydrogen with oxygen favours production of water. Systems for direct synthesis have been developed; most of which are based around finely dispersed metal catalysts. Noritaka Mizuno Gabriele Centi, Siglinda Perathoner, Salvatore Abate "Direct Synthesis of Hydrogen Peroxide: Recent Advances" in Modern Heterogeneous Oxidation Catalysis: Design, Reactions and Characterization" 2009, Wiley-VCH. However none of these have yet reached a point where they can be used for industrial-scale synthesis.

===Availability===
ISO tank container for hydrogen peroxide transportation

Hydrogen peroxide is most commonly available as a solution in water. For consumers, it is usually available from pharmacies at 3 and 6 wt% concentrations. The concentrations are sometimes described in terms of the volume of oxygen gas generated; one milliliter of a 20-volume solution generates twenty milliliters of oxygen gas when completely decomposed. For laboratory use, 30 wt% solutions are most common. Commercial grades from 70% to 98% are also available, but due to the potential of solutions of >68% hydrogen peroxide to be converted entirely to steam and oxygen (with the temperature of the steam increasing as the concentration increases above 68%) these grades are potentially far more hazardous, and require special care in dedicated storage areas. Buyers must typically allow inspection by commercial manufacturers.

In 1994, world production of was around 1.9 million tonnes and grew to 2.2 million in 2006, most of which was at a concentration of 70% or less. In that year bulk 30% sold for around US $0.54 per kg, equivalent to US $1.50 per kg (US $0.68 per lb) on a "100% basis". Hydrogen Peroxide Synthesis researchgate research for Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India 

==Reactions==

===Decomposition===
Hydrogen peroxide is thermodynamically unstable and decomposes to form water and oxygen with a ΔHo of −98.2 kJ·mol−1 and a ΔS of 70.5 J·mol−1·K−1.

:2 → 2 + 

The rate of decomposition increases with rising temperature, concentration and pH, with cool, dilute, acidic solutions showing the best stability. Decomposition is catalysed by various compounds, including most transition metals and their compounds (e.g. manganese dioxide, silver, and platinum). Certain metal ions, such as or , can cause the decomposition to take a different path, with free radicals such as (HO·) and (HOO·) being formed.

Non-metallic catalysts include potassium iodide; which reacts particularly rapidly and forms the basis of the Elephant toothpaste experiment. Hydrogen peroxide can also be decomposed biologically by enzyme catalase.

The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide liberates oxygen and heat; this can be dangerous as spilling high concentrations of hydrogen peroxide on a flammable substance can cause an immediate fire.

===Redox reactions===
Hydrogen peroxide exhibits oxidizing and reducing properties, depending on pH.

In acidic solutions, is one of the most powerful oxidizers known—stronger than chlorine, chlorine dioxide, and potassium permanganate. Also, through catalysis, can be converted into hydroxyl radicals (•OH), which are highly reactive.

 Oxidant/Reduced product Oxidation potential, V 
 Fluorine/Hydrogen fluoride 3.0 
 Ozone/Oxygen 2.1 
 Hydrogen peroxide/Water 1.8 
 Potassium permanganate/Manganese dioxide 1.7 
 Chlorine dioxide/HClO 1.5 
 Chlorine/Chloride 1.4 

In acidic solutions is oxidized to (hydrogen peroxide acting as an oxidizing agent),

:2 (aq) + + 2 (aq) → 2 (aq) + 2 (l)

and sulfite () is oxidized to sulfate (). However, potassium permanganate is reduced to by acidic . Under alkaline conditions, however, some of these reactions reverse; for example, is oxidized to (as ).

In basic solution, hydrogen peroxide can reduce a variety of inorganic ions. When it acts as a reducing agent, oxygen gas is also produced. For example hydrogen peroxide will reduce sodium hypochlorite and potassium permanganate, which is a convenient method for preparing oxygen in the laboratory.
:NaOCl + → + NaCl + 
:2 + 3 → 2 + 2 KOH + 2 + 3 

====Organic substrates====
Hydrogen peroxide is frequently used as an oxidizing agent in organic chemistry. One application is for the oxidation of thioethers to sulfoxides. Kabayadi S. Ravikumar, Venkitasamy Kesavan, Benoit Crousse, Danièle Bonnet-Delpon, Jean-Pierre Bégué
 "Mild and Selective Oxidation of Sulfur Compounds in Trifluoroethanol: Diphenyldisulfide and Methyl phenyl Sulfoxide" Org. Synth. 2003, vol. 80, 184.
 For example, methyl phenyl sulfide can be readily oxidized in high yield to methyl phenyl sulfoxide: 

:Ph + → Ph + 

Alkaline hydrogen peroxide is used for epoxidation of electron-deficient alkenes such as acrylic acids, and also for oxidation of alkylboranes to alcohols, the second step of hydroboration-oxidation.

===Formation of peroxide compounds===
Hydrogen peroxide is a weak acid, and it can form hydroperoxide or peroxide salts or derivatives of many metals.

For example, on addition to an aqueous solution of chromic acid () or acidic solutions of dichromate salts, it will form an unstable blue peroxide CrO(. In aqueous solution it rapidly decomposes to form oxygen gas and chromium salts.

It can also produce peroxoanions by reaction with anions; for example, reaction with borax leads to sodium perborate, a bleach used in laundry detergents:

: + 4 + 2 NaOH → 2 + 

 converts carboxylic acids (RCOOH) into peroxy acids (RCOOOH), which are themselves used as oxidizing agents. Hydrogen peroxide reacts with acetone to form acetone peroxide, and it interacts with ozone to form hydrogen trioxide, also known as trioxidane. Reaction with urea produces the adduct hydrogen peroxide - urea, used for whitening teeth. An acid-base adduct with triphenylphosphine oxide is a useful "carrier" for in some reactions.

==Biological function==
Hydrogen peroxide is also one of the two chief chemicals in the defense system of the bombardier beetle, reacting with hydroquinone to discourage predators.

A study published in Nature found that hydrogen peroxide plays a role in the immune system. Scientists found that hydrogen peroxide inside of cells increased after tissues are damaged in zebra fish, which is thought to act as a signal to white blood cells to converge on the site and initiate the healing process. When the genes required to produce hydrogen peroxide were disabled, white blood cells did not accumulate at the site of damage. The experiments were conducted on fish; however, because fish are genetically similar to humans, the same process is speculated to occur in humans. The study in Nature suggested asthma sufferers have higher levels of hydrogen peroxide in their lungs than healthy people, which could explain why asthma sufferers have inappropriate levels of white blood cells in their lungs. 

Hydrogen peroxide has important roles as a signaling molecule in the regulation of a wide variety of biological processes. The compound is a major factor implicated in the free-radical theory of aging, based on how readily hydrogen peroxide can decompose into a hydroxyl radical and how superoxide radical byproducts of cellular metabolism can react with ambient water to form hydrogen peroxide. These hydroxyl radicals in turn readily react with and damage vital cellular components, especially those of the mitochondria. At least one study has also tried to link hydrogen peroxide production to cancer. These studies have frequently been quoted in fraudulent treatment claims.

The amount of hydrogen peroxide in biological systems can be assayed using a fluorimetric assay. 

==Applications==
===Industrial===
About 60% of the world's production of hydrogen peroxide is used for pulp- and paper-bleaching. 
The second major industrial application is the manufacture of sodium percarbonate and sodium perborate which are used as mild bleaches in laundry detergents.

It is used in the production of various organic peroxides with dibenzoyl peroxide being a high volume example. It is used in polymerisations, as a flour bleaching agent and as a treatment for acne. Peroxy acids, such as peracetic acid and meta-chloroperoxybenzoic acid are also typically produced using hydrogen peroxide.

Hydrogen peroxide is used in certain waste-water treatment processes to remove organic impurities. This is achieved by advanced oxidation processes, such as the Fenton reaction, which use it to generate highly reactive hydroxyl radicals (·OH). These are able to destroy organic contaminates which are ordinarily difficult to remove, such as aromatic or halogenated compounds. It can also oxidise sulphur based compounds present in the waste; which is beneficial as it generally reduces their odour. 

===Medical===
====Disinfectant====
Skin shortly after exposure to 35% 

Hydrogen peroxide is seen as an environmentally benign alternative to chlorine-based bleaches. It can be used for the disinfection of various surfaces Joseph M. Ascenzi, Handbook of Disinfectant and Antiseptics, CRC Press, 1996, ISBN 0824795245, page 161. and is generally recognized as safe as an antimicrobial agent by the U.S. FDA. However studies have found it to be ineffective in certain cases and hospitals and other medical institutions are now being advised to use chlorine-based bleaches for disinfection. Bleach vs. Hydrogen Peroxide (Canadian Agency for Durgs and Technology in Health website) 

Historically, hydrogen peroxide was commonly used for disinfecting wounds, partly because of its low cost and ready availability compared to other antiseptics. It is now thought to slow healing and lead to scarring because it destroys newly formed skin cells. Only a very low concentration of H2O2 can induce healing, and only if not repeatedly applied. Surgical use can lead to gas embolism formation. Shaw A, Cooperman A, Fusco J. Gas embolism produced by hydrogen peroxide. N Engl J Med 1967; 277: 238–41. 

It is absorbed by skin upon contact and creates a local capillary embolism that appears as a temporary whitening of the skin. Toxicology of Hydrogen Peroxide, p.4 

====Cosmetic applications====
Diluted (between 3% and 8%) mixed with ammonium hydroxide is used to bleach human hair. The chemical's bleaching property lends its name to the phrase "peroxide blonde". 
Hydrogen peroxide is also used for tooth whitening and can be mixed with baking soda and salt to make a home-made a toothpaste. 

Hydrogen peroxide may be used to treat acne, although benzoyl peroxide is a more common treatment. 

====Use in alternative medicine ====
Practitioners of alternative medicine have advocated the use of hydrogen peroxide for the treatment of various conditions, including emphysema, influenza, AIDS and in particular cancer. The practise calls for the daily consumption of hydrogen peroxide, either orally or by injection and is, in general, based around 2 precepts. Firstly that hydrogen peroxide is naturally produced by the body to combat infection. Secondly, that human pathogens (including cancer: See Warburg hypothesis) are anaerobic and cannot survive in oxygen-rich environments. The ingestion or injection of hydrogen peroxide is therefore believed to kill disease by mimicking the immune response in addition to increasing levels of oxygen within the body. This makes it similar to other oxygen-based therapies, such as ozone therapy and hyperbaric oxygen therapy.

Both the effectiveness and safety of hydrogen peroxide therapy is refuted by mainstream scientists, who typify its supporting arguments as sophistry. Hydrogen peroxide is produced by the immune system but in a carefully controlled manner. Cells called by phagocytes engulf pathogens and then use hydrogen peroxide to destroy them. The peroxide is toxic to both the cell and the pathogen and so is kept within a special compartment, called a phagosome. Free hydrogen peroxide will damage any tissue it encounters via oxidative stress; a process which also has been proposed as a cause of cancer. 
Claims that hydrogen peroxide therapy increase cellular levels of oxygen have not been supported. The quantities administered would be expected to provide very little additional oxygen compared to that available from normal respiration. It should also be noted that it is difficult to raise the level of oxygen around cancer cells within a tumour, as the blood supply tends to be poor.

Large oral doses of hydrogen peroxide at a 3% concentration may cause irritation and blistering to the mouth, throat, and abdomen as well as abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. Hydrogen Peroxide, 3%. 3. Hazards Identification Southeast Fisheries Science Center, daughter agency of NOAA. 
Intravenous injection of hydrogen peroxide has been linked to several deaths. 

The American Cancer Society states that "there is no scientific evidence that hydrogen peroxide is a safe, effective or useful cancer treatment" The therapy is not approved by the U.S. FDA.

===Propellant===

Rocket Belt hydrogen peroxide propulsion system used in a jet pack

High concentration is referred to as High Test Peroxide (HTP). It can be used either as a monopropellant (not mixed with fuel) or as the oxidizer component of a bipropellant rocket. Use as a monopropellant takes advantage of the decomposition of 70–98+% concentration hydrogen peroxide into steam and oxygen. The propellant is pumped into a reaction chamber where a catalyst, usually a silver or platinum screen, triggers decomposition, producing steam at over 600 °C (1,112 °F), which is expelled through a nozzle, generating thrust. monopropellant produces a maximum specific impulse (Isp) of 161 s (1.6 kN·s/kg), which makes it a low-performance monopropellant. Peroxide generates much less thrust than hydrazine. The Bell Rocket Belt used hydrogen peroxide monopropellant.

As a bipropellant is decomposed to burn a fuel as an oxidizer. Specific impulses as high as 350 s (3.5 kN·s/kg) can be achieved, depending on the fuel. Peroxide used as an oxidizer gives a somewhat lower Isp than liquid oxygen, but is dense, storable, noncryogenic and can be more easily used to drive gas turbines to give high pressures using an efficient closed cycle. It can also be used for regenerative cooling of rocket engines. Peroxide was used very successfully as an oxidizer in World War II German rocket motors (e.g. T-Stoff, containing oxyquinoline stabilizer, for the Me 163B), most often used with C-Stoff in a self-igniting hypergolic combination, and for the low-cost British Black Knight and Black Arrow launchers. 

In the 1940s and 1950s, the Walter turbine used hydrogen peroxide for use in submarines while submerged; it was found to be too noisy and require too much maintenance compared to diesel-electric power systems. Some torpedoes used hydrogen peroxide as oxidizer or propellant, but this was dangerous and has been discontinued by most navies. Hydrogen peroxide leaks were blamed for the sinkings of HMS Sidon and the Russian submarine Kursk. It was discovered, for example, by the Japanese Navy in torpedo trials, that the concentration of in right-angle bends in HTP pipework can often lead to explosions in submarines and torpedoes. SAAB Underwater Systems is manufacturing the Torpedo 2000. This torpedo, used by the Swedish navy, is powered by a piston engine propelled by HTP as an oxidizer and kerosene as a fuel in a bipropellant system. Soyuz using hydrogen peroxide propellant (NASA website) 

While rarely used now as a monopropellant for large engines, small hydrogen peroxide attitude control thrusters are still in use on some satellites.They are easy to throttle, and safer to fuel and handle before launch than hydrazine thrusters. However, hydrazine is more often used in spacecraft because of its higher specific impulse and lower rate of decomposition.

==== Explosives ====
Hydrogen peroxide has been used for creating organic peroxide based explosives, such as acetone peroxide, for improvised explosive devices, including the 7 July 2005 London bombings. Tiny cheap deadly hydrogen peroxide bombs, 2009 article about home made bombs and their use in terror attacks. (NBC News) These explosives tend to degrade quickly and hence are not used as commercial or military explosives.

===Other uses===
Chemiluminescence of cyalume, as found in a glow stick

Hydrogen peroxide has various domestic uses, primarily as a cleaning and disinfecting agent. 

;Glow sticks
Hydrogen peroxide reacts with certain esters, such as cyalume and phenyl oxalate ester, to produce chemiluminescence; this application is most commonly encountered in form of glow sticks.

;Horticulture:
Some horticulturalists and users of hydroponics advocate the use of weak hydrogen peroxide solution in watering solutions. Its spontaneous decomposition releases oxygen that enhances a plant's root development and helps to treat root rot (cellular root death due to lack of oxygen) and a variety of other pests. Ways to use hydrogen peroxide in the garden 

;Fish Aeration
Laboratory tests conducted by fish culturists in recent years have demonstrated that common household hydrogen peroxide can be used safely to provide oxygen for small fish. The hydrogen peroxide releases oxygen by decomposition when it is exposed to catalysts such as manganese dioxide. Great-lakes.org fws.gov 

==Safety==
Regulations vary, but low concentrations, such as 6%, are widely available and legal to buy for medical use. Most over-the-counter peroxide solutions are not suitable for ingestion. Higher concentrations may be considered hazardous and are typically accompanied by a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS). In high concentrations, hydrogen peroxide is an aggressive oxidizer and will corrode many materials, including human skin. In the presence of a reducing agent, high concentrations of will react violently.

High-concentration hydrogen peroxide streams, typically above 40%, should be considered hazardous due to concentrated hydrogen peroxide's meeting the definition of a DOT oxidizer according to U.S. regulations, if released into the environment. The EPA Reportable Quantity (RQ) for D001 hazardous wastes is 100 lb, or approximately 10 USgal, of concentrated hydrogen peroxide.

Hydrogen peroxide should be stored in a cool, dry, well-ventilated area and away from any flammable or combustible substances. Hydrogen Peroxide MSDS It should be stored in a container composed of non-reactive materials such as stainless steel or glass (other materials including some plastics and aluminium alloys may also be suitable). Ozonelab Peroxide compatibility Because it breaks down quickly when exposed to light, it should be stored in an opaque container, and pharmaceutical formulations typically come in brown bottles that filter out light. 

Hydrogen peroxide, either in pure or diluted form, can pose several risks, the main one being that it forms explosive mixtures upon contact with organic compounds. Highly concentrate hydrogen peroxide itself is unstable, and can then cause a boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) of the remaining liquid. Distillation of hydrogen peroxide at normal pressures is thus highly dangerous. It is also corrosive especially when concentrated but even domestic-strength solutions can cause irritation to the eyes, mucous membranes and skin. For example, see an MSDS for a 3% peroxide solution. Swallowing hydrogen peroxide solutions is particularly dangerous, as decomposition in the stomach releases large quantities of gas (10 times the volume of a 3% solution) leading to internal bleeding. Inhaling over 10% can cause severe pulmonary irritation. H2O2 toxicity and dangers Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry website 

With a significant vapor pressure (1.2 kPa at 50 °CHandbook of Chemistry and Physics, 76th Ed, 1995–1996), hydrogen peroxide vapor is potentially hazardous. According to the U.S. NIOSH Immediately dangerous to life and health limit (IDLH) is only 75 ppm. Documentation for Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health Concentrations (IDLH): NIOSH National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health&#93; Chemical Listing and Documentation of Revised IDLH Values (as of 3/1/95)] The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has established a permissible exposure limit of 1.0 ppm calculated as an eight hour time weighted average (29 CFR 1910.1000, Table Z-1) Occupational Safety and Health Guideline for Hydrogen Peroxide and hydrogen peroxide has also been classified by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) as a "known animal carcinogen, with unknown relevance on humans." Threshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents & Biological Exposure Indices, ACGIH Information on the hazards of hydrogen peroxide is available from OSHA and from the ATSDR. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 

===Historical incidents===
* On 16 July 1934, in Kummersdorf, Germany, a rocket engine using hydrogen peroxide exploded, killing three people. As a result of this incident, Wernher von Braun decided not to use hydrogen peroxide as an oxidizer in the rockets he developed afterward.

* During the Second World War, doctors in German concentration camps experimented with the use of hydrogen peroxide injections in the killing of human subjects. 

* Several people received minor injuries after a hydrogen peroxide spill on board a flight between the U.S. cities Orlando and Memphis on 28 October 1998. Hazardous Materials Incident Brief DCA-99-MZ-001, "Spill of undeclared shipment of hazardous materials in cargo compartment of aircraft". pub: National Transportation Safety Board. 28 October 1998; adopted 17 May 2000. 

* Hydrogen peroxide was said to be one of the ingredients in the bombs that failed to explode in the July 21, 2005 London bombings. Four Men Found Guilty in Plot to Blow Up London's Transit System, "FOXNews.com". (9 July 2007) 

* The Russian submarine K-141 Kursk sailed out to sea to perform an exercise of firing dummy torpedoes at the Pyotr Velikiy, a Kirov class battlecruiser. On 12 August 2000 at 11:28 local time (07:28 UTC), there was an explosion while preparing to fire the torpedoes. The only credible report to date is that this was due to the failure and explosion of one of the Kursk's hydrogen peroxide-fueled torpedoes. It is believed that HTP, a form of highly concentrated hydrogen peroxide used as propellant for the torpedo, seeped through rust in the torpedo casing. A similar incident was responsible for the loss of HMS Sidon in 1955.

* On 15 August 2010 a spill of about 30 USgal of cleaning fluid occurred on the 54th floor of 1515 Broadway, in Times Square, New York City. The spill, which a spokesperson for the New York City fire department said was of hydrogen peroxide, shut down Broadway between West 42nd and West 48th streets as fire engines responded to the hazmat situation. There were no reported injuries. 

==See also==
* Elephant toothpaste

==References==
Notes

Bibliography

* 
* A great description of properties & chemistry of .
* 
* 

==External links==
* Hydrogen Peroxide at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* Material Safety Data Sheet
* ATSDR Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry FAQ
* International Chemical Safety Card 0164
* NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards
* Process flow sheet of Hydrogen Peroxide Production by anthrahydroquinone autoxidation


