[[Immaculate Conception]]

The Immaculate Conception is, according to the teaching of the Catholic Church, the unique privilege by which, when the Blessed Virgin Mary was conceived in her mother's womb, she was kept free of original sin through the anticipated merits of Jesus Christ. The teaching about her immaculate conception is a dogma of the Church and her immaculate conception itself is celebrated with an annual feast day. Catechism of the Catholic Church, 490-493 

The doctrine of the immaculate conception of Mary concerns her own conception in her mother's womb, not Mary's conception of Jesus (the virgin birth of Jesus) nor the perpetual virginity of Mary.

Although the belief that Mary was sinless and conceived immaculate was widely held since at least Late Antiquity, the doctrine was not dogmatically defined until December 8, 1854, by Pope Pius IX in his papal bull Ineffabilis Deus.

The Feast of the Immaculate Conception is observed on December 8 in many Catholic countries as a holy day of obligation or patronal feast, and in some as a national public holiday.

Because of the belief that she was immaculately conceived, Mary is referred to as the Immaculata (Latin for "the Immaculate One").
 
==Distinctions==

===Original sin and actual (personal) sin===
The defined dogma of the Immaculate Conception regards original sin only, saying that Mary was preserved from any stain (in Latin, macula or labes, the second of these two synonymous words being the one used in the formal definition). "the doctrine which holds that the most Blessed Virgin Mary, in the first instance of her conception, by a singular grace and privilege granted by Almighty God, in view of the merits of Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the human race, was preserved free from all stain of original sin" (Encyclical Ineffabilis Deus of Pope Pius IX) The proclaimed Roman Catholic dogma states "that the most Blessed Virgin Mary, in the first instance of her conception, by a singular grace and privilege granted by Almighty God, in view of the merits of Jesus Christ, the Saviour of the human race, was preserved free from all stain of original sin." Therefore, being always free from original sin, the doctrine teaches that from her conception Mary received the sanctifying grace that would normally come with baptism after birth.

The definition makes no declaration about the Church's belief that the Blessed Virgin was sinless in the sense of freedom from actual or personal sin. Encyclopaedia Britannica 1911, "The Immaculate Conception" However, the Church holds that Mary was also sinless personally, "free from all sin, original or personal". Encyclical Mystici Corporis, 110 The Council of Trent decreed: "If anyone shall say that a man once justified can sin no more, nor lose grace, and that therefore he who falls and sins was never truly justified; or, on the contrary, that throughout his whole life he can avoid all sins even venial sins, except by a special privilege of God, as the Church holds in regard to the Blessed Virgin: let him be anathema." Denzinger 833, old numbering. 

===Virginal conception===
The doctrine of the immaculate conception (Mary being conceived free from original sin) is not to be confused with her virginal conception of her son Jesus. This misunderstanding of the term immaculate conception is frequently met in the mass media. Catholics believe that Mary was not the product of a virginal conception herself but was the daughter of a human father and mother, As the Catholic Encyclopedia (1913) somewhat coyly puts it, "Her body was formed in the womb of the mother, and the father had the usual share in its formation. The question does not concern the immaculateness of the generative activity of her parents.", "Immaculate Conception", Catholic Encyclopedia traditionally known by the names of Saint Joachim and Saint Anne. In 1677, the Holy See condemned the belief that Mary was virginally conceived, which had been a belief surfacing occasionally since the 4th century. "St Anne", Catholic Encyclopedia The Church celebrates the Feast of the Immaculate Conception (when Mary was conceived free from original sin) on 8 December, exactly nine months before celebrating the Nativity of Mary. The feast of the Annunciation (which commemorates the virginal conception and the Incarnation of Jesus) is celebrated on 25 March, nine months before Christmas Day. The Catholicism Answer Book by John Trigilio, Kenneth Brighenti 2007 ISBN 1-4022-0806-5 page 59-62 What Every Catholic Should Know about Mary by Terrence J. McNally ISBN 1-4415-1051-6 pages 104-108 

===Redemption===
Another misunderstanding is that, by her immaculate conception, Mary did not need a saviour. When defining the dogma in Ineffabilis Deus, Pope Pius IX explicitly affirmed that Mary was redeemed in a manner more sublime. He stated that Mary, rather than being cleansed after sin, was completely prevented from contracting Original Sin in view of the foreseen merits of Jesus Christ, the Savior of the human race. In , Mary proclaims: "My spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour." This is referred to as Mary's pre-redemption by Christ. Since the Council of Orange II against semi-pelagianism, the Catholic Church has taught that even had man never sinned in the Garden of Eden and was sinless, he would still require God's grace to remain sinless. Council of Orange II, Canon 19 "That no one is saved except by God's mercy. Even if human nature remained in that integrity in which it was formed, it would in no way save itself without the help of its Creator; therefore, since without the grace of God it cannot guard the health which it received, how without the grace of God will it be able to recover what it has lost?" Theology for Beginners by Francis Joseph Sheed 1958 ISBN 0-7220-7425-5 pages 134-138 

==History==

A feast of the Conception of the Most Holy and All Pure Mother of God was celebrated in Syria on 8 December perhaps as early as the 5th century. Note that the title of achrantos (spotless, immaculate, all-pure) refers to the holiness of Mary, not specifically to the holiness of her conception. "The celebration of the Mother of God as immaculate (achrantos), is a clear and universal recognition of her exceptional and iconic sanctity. Orthodoxy did not follow the path of Roman Catholicism in moving towards a recognition of her Immaculate Conception" ( John Anthony McGuckin, The Orthodox Church: An Introduction to Its History, Doctrine, and Spiritual Culture (Blackwell 2011 ISBN 978-1-4443-3731-0), p. 218.) 
11th-century Eastern Orthodox icon of the Theotokos Panachranta, i.e. the "all immaculate" Mary Raymond Burke, 2008, Mariology: A Guide for Priests, Deacons,seminarians, and Consecrated Persons Queenship Publishing ISBN 1-57918-355-7 page [http://books.google.com/books?id=ez0VRbQi1i4C&pg=PA251&dq=Panachranta&hl=en&ei=wfNcTqapHuSD4gTjnOQU&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=4&ved=0CDgQ6AEwAw#v=onepage&q=Panachranta&f=false ]]

By the 7th century the feast of her conception was widely celebrated in the East, under the name of the Conception (active) of Saint Anne. In the West it was known as the feast of the Conception (passive) of Mary, and was associated particularly with the Normans, whether these introduced it directly from the East Francis X. Weiser, The Holyday Book (Harcourt, Brace and Co. 1956) or took it from English usage. Michael Kunzler, The Church's Liturgy (Continuum International 2002 ISBN 978-0-8264-1353-6), pp. 434-435 The spread of the feast, by now with the adjective "Immaculate" attached to its title, met opposition on the part of some, on the grounds that sanctification was possible only after conception. Frederick Holweck, "Immaculate Conception" in The Catholic Encyclopedia 1910 Critics included Saints Bernard of Clairvaux, Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas. Other theologians defended the expression "Immaculate Conception", pointing out that sanctification could be conferred at the first moment of conception in view of the foreseen merits of Christ, a view held especially by Franciscans. Matthew Bunson, OSV's Encyclopedia of Catholic History (Our Sunday Visitor 2004 ISBN 978-1-59276-026-8), p. 455 

Writers such as Mark Miravalle and Sarah Jane Boss interpret the existence of the feast as a strong indication of the Church's traditional belief in the Immaculate Conception. Mark Miravalle, 1993, Introduction to Mary, Queenship Publishing ISBN 978-1-882972-06-7 page 66-69 Mary by Sarah Jane Boss, Neil Warmsley 2004 ISBN 0-8264-5788-6 page 139 

On 28 February 1476, Pope Sixtus IV, a Franciscan after whom the Sistine Chapel is named, authorized those dioceses that wished to introduce the feast to do so, and introduced it to his own diocese of Rome in 1477, with a specially composed Mass and Office of the feast. John D. Bryant, The Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God" (Boston 1855), p. 166 With his bull Cum praeexcelsa of 28 February 1477, in which he referred to the feast as that of the Conception of Mary, without using the word "Immaculate", he granted indulgences to those who would participate in the specially composed Mass or Office on the feast itself or during its octave, and he used the word "immaculate" of Mary, but applied instead the adjective "miraculous" to her conception. Denzinger 734 (old numbering) Saint Conleth's Catholic Heritage Association On 4 September 1483, referring to the feast as that of "the Conception of Immaculate Mary ever Virgin", he condemned both those who called it mortally sinful and heretical to hold that the "glorious and immaculate mother of God was conceived without the stain of original sin" and those who called it mortally sinful and heretical to hold that "the glorious Virgin Mary was conceived with original sin", since, he said, "up to this time there has been no decision made by the Roman Church and the Apostolic See." Denzinger 735 (old numbering) This decree was reaffirmed by the Council of Trent. Denzinger 792 (old numbering) 

One of the chief proponents of the doctrine was the Hungarian Franciscan Pelbartus Ladislaus of Temesvár.
 Z. J. Kosztolnyik, Some Hungarian Theologians in the Late Renaissance, Church History. Volume: 57. Issue: 1, 1988. Z. J. Kosztolnyik, Pelbartus of Temesvar: a Francican Preacher and Writer of the Late Middle Ages in Hungary, Vivarium, 5/1967. Kenan B. Osborne, O.F.M., The History of Franciscan Theology, The Franciscan Institute St. Bonaventure, New York, 1994. Franklin H. Littell (ed.), Reformation Studies, John Knox Press, Richmond, Virginia, 1962. 

Pope Pius V, while including the feast in the Tridentine Calendar, removed the adjective "Immaculate" and suppressed the existing special Mass for the feast, directing that the Mass for the Nativity of Mary (with the word "Nativity" replaced by "Conception") be used instead. Paul Cavendish, "The Tridentine Mass" Part of that earlier Mass was revived in the Mass that Pope Pius IX ordered to be used on the feast and that is still in use. Marion A. Habig, "Land of Mary Immaculate" 

On 6 December 1708, Pope Clement XI made the feast of the Conception of Mary, at that time still with the Nativity of Mary formula for the Mass, a Holy Day of Obligation. Until Pope Pius X reduced in 1911 the number of Holy Days of Obligation to 8, there were in the course of the year 36 such days, apart from Sundays. Supremi disciplinæ in Catholic Encyclopedia 

===Definition of the dogma===
Altar of the Immaculata by Joseph Lusenberg, 1876. Saint Antony's Church, Urtijëi, Italy.

During the reign of Pope Gregory XVI the bishops in various countries began to press for a definition as dogma of the teaching of Mary's immaculate conception. "These petitions were renewed in these our own times; they were especially brought to the attention of Gregory XVI" (Ineffabilis Deus). 

In 1839 Mariano Spada (1796 - 1872), professor of theology at the Roman College of Saint Thomas, published Esame Critico sulla dottrina dell’ Angelico Dottore S. Tommaso di Aquino circa il Peccato originale, relativamente alla Beatissima Vergine Maria critical examination of the doctrine of St. Thomas Aquinas, the Angelic Doctor, regarding original sin with respect to the Most Blessed Virgin Mary, in which Aquinas is interpreted not as treating the question of the Immaculate Conception later formulated in the papal bull Ineffabilis Deus but rather the sanctification of the fetus within Mary's womb. Spada furnished an interpretation whereby Pius IX was relieved of the problem of seeming to foster a doctrine not in agreement with the Aquinas' teaching. 3-11-2013; Il mistero di Maria: teologia, storia, devozione by Giuseppe Damigella, p. 175: "Pio IX si senti' sollevato dal peso teologico di dover sostenere una dottrina non fondata nel pensiero di san Tommaso, il cui insegnamento era allora, come oggi, ritenuto "sicuro"." Cf. A. Andaloro, "P. Mariano Spada, o.p. interprete di San Tommaso sull'Immucolata Concezione," Catania, 1958 Pope Pius IX would later appoint Spada Master of the Sacred Palace in 1867.

Pius IX, at the beginning of his pontificate, and again after 1851, appointed commissions to investigate the whole subject, and he was advised that the doctrine was one which could be defined and that the time for a definition was opportune.

It was not until 1854 that Pope Pius IX, with the support of the overwhelming majority of Roman Catholic bishops, whom he had consulted between 1851–1853, promulgated the papal bull Ineffabilis Deus (Latin for "Ineffable God"), which defined ex cathedra the dogma of the Immaculate Conception: The Creeds of Christendom by Philip Schaff 2009 ISBN 1-115-46834-0 page 211 

The dogma was defined in accordance with the conditions of papal infallibility, which would be defined in 1870 by the First Vatican Council.

The papal definition of the dogma declares with absolute certainty and authority that Mary possessed sanctifying grace from the first instant of her existence and was free from the lack of grace caused by the original sin at the beginning of human history. Mary's salvation was won by her son Jesus Christ through his passion, death, and resurrection and was not due to her own merits. Jenny Schroedel, The Everything Mary Book (Adams 2006 ISBN 1-59337-713-4) pp. 180-181" Mark Miravalle, 1993, Introduction to Mary, Queenship Publishing ISBN 978-1-882972-06-7 page 64-70 

===Later developments===
For the Roman Catholic Church the dogma of the Immaculate Conception gained additional significance from the reputed apparitions of Our Lady of Lourdes in 1858. At Lourdes a 14-year-old girl, Bernadette Soubirous, claimed that a beautiful woman appeared to her and said, "I am the Immaculate Conception". Many believe the woman to have been the Blessed Virgin Mary and pray to her as such. EWTN Vatican website 

Pope Pius IX defined the dogma of the Immaculate Conception "not so much because of proofs in Scripture or ancient tradition, but due to a profound sensus fidelium and the Magisterium". 

Speaking of the witness of the Church Fathers in claiming for Mary titles such as "Free from all contagion of sin", Pope Pius XII wrote:

The Roman Catholic tradition has a well-established philosophy for the study of the Immaculate Conception and the veneration of the Blessed Virgin Mary in the field of Mariology, with Pontifical schools such as the Marianum specifically devoted to this. Mariology Society of America http://mariologicalsocietyofamerica.us Centers of Marian Study http://www.servidimaria.org/en/attualita/promotori2/promotori2.htm Publisher’s Notice in the Second Italian Edition (1986), reprinted in English Edition, Gabriel Roschini, O.S.M. (1989). The Virgin Mary in the Writings of Maria Valtorta (English Edition). Kolbe's Publication Inc. ISBN 2-920285-08-4 

According to Bernard Ullathorne, a 19th-century English Roman Catholic prelate, "the expressions - The Immaculate Conception - The Immaculate Preservation - The Immunity - and Exception from original sin, are all phrases which bear the same signification, and are used equally to express one and the same mystery." Ullathorne, William Bernard, The immaculate conception of the Mother of God, an exposition, 1855.
 

==Medieval dispute about the doctrine==

It seems to have been St Bernard of Clairvaux who, in the 12th century, explicitly raised the question of the Immaculate Conception. A feast of the Conception of the Blessed Virgin had already begun to be celebrated in some churches of the West. St Bernard blames the canons of the metropolitan church of Lyon for instituting such a festival without the permission of the Holy See. In doing so, he takes occasion to repudiate altogether the view that the conception of Mary was sinless. It is doubtful, however, whether he was using the term "conception" in the same sense in which it is used in the definition of Pope Pius IX. Bernard would seem to have been speaking of conception in the active sense of the mother's cooperation, for in his argument he says: "How can there be absence of sin where there is concupiscence (libido)?" and stronger expressions follow, showing that he is speaking of the mother and not of the child. 

Saint Thomas Aquinas, the greatest of the medieval scholastics, refused to admit the Immaculate Conception, on the ground that, unless the Blessed Virgin had at one time or other been one of the sinful, she could not justly be said to have been redeemed by Christ. Summa Theologica, III, q. 27, art. 3 

Saint Bonaventure (d. 1274), second only to Saint Thomas in his influence on the Christian schools of his age, hesitated to accept it for a similar reason. He believed that Mary was completely free from sin, but that she was not given this grace at the instant of her conception. Mary's Immaculate Conception 

The celebrated John Duns Scotus (d. 1308), a Friar Minor like Saint Bonaventure, argued, on the contrary, that from a rational point of view it was certainly as little derogatory to the merits of Christ to assert that Mary was by him preserved from all taint of sin, as to say that she first contracted it and then was delivered. Proposing a solution to the theological problem of reconciling the doctrine with that of universal redemption in Christ, he argued that Mary's immaculate conception did not remove her from redemption by Christ; rather it was the result of a more perfect redemption granted her because of her special role in salvation history. Encyclopedia of theology: a concise Sacramentum mundi by Karl Rahner 2004 ISBN 0-86012-006-6 pages 896-898 

The arguments of Scotus, combined with a better acquaintance with the language of the early Fathers, gradually prevailed in the schools of the Western Church. In 1387 the university of Paris strongly condemned the opposite view. 

Scotus's arguments remained controversial, however, particularly among the Dominicans, who were willing enough to celebrate Mary's sanctificatio (being made free from sin) but, following the Dominican Thomas Aquinas' arguments, continued to insist that her sanctification could not have occurred until after her conception. 

Popular opinion remained firmly behind the celebration of Mary's conception. In 1439, the Council of Basel, which is not reckoned an ecumenical council, stated that belief in the immaculate conception of Mary is in accord with the Catholic faith. Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Encyclopedia (Merriam-Webster 2001 ISBN 978-0-87779-017-4), p. 795 By the end of the 15th century the belief was widely professed and taught in many theological faculties, but such was the influence of the Dominicans, and the weight of the arguments of Thomas Aquinas (who had been canonised in 1323 and declared "Doctor Angelicus" of the Church in 1567) that the Council of Trent (1545–63)—which might have been expected to affirm the doctrine—instead declined to take a position. 

==Church Fathers==
It is admitted that the doctrine as defined by Pius IX was not explicitly mooted before the 12th century. It is also agreed that "no direct or categorical and stringent proof of the dogma can be brought forward from Scripture". But it is claimed that the doctrine is implicitly contained in the teaching of the Fathers. Their expressions on the subject of the sinlessness of Mary are, it is pointed out, so ample and so absolute that they must be taken to include original sin as well as actual. Thus in the first five centuries such epithets as "in every respect holy", "in all things unstained", "super-innocent", and "singularly holy" are applied to her; she is compared to Eve before the fall, as ancestress of a redeemed people; she is "the earth before it was accursed". The well-known words of St. Augustine (d. 430) may be cited: "As regards the mother of God," he says, "I will not allow any question whatever of sin." It is true that he is here speaking directly of actual or personal sin. But his argument is that all men are sinners; that they are so through original depravity; that this original depravity may be overcome by the grace of God, and he adds that he does not know but that Mary may have had sufficient grace to overcome sin "of every sort" (omni ex parte). 

The papal bull defining the dogma, Ineffabilis Deus, mentioned in particular the patrististic interpretation of as referring to a woman, Mary, who would be eternally at enmity with the evil serpent and completely triumphing over him. It said the Fathers saw foreshadowings of Mary's "wondrous abundance of divine gifts and original innocence" "in that ark of Noah, which was built by divine command and escaped entirely safe and sound from the common shipwreck of the whole world; in the ladder which Jacob saw reaching from the earth to heaven, by whose rungs the angels of God ascended and descended, and on whose top the Lord himself leaned; in that bush which Moses saw in the holy place burning on all sides, which was not consumed or injured in any way but grew green and blossomed beautifully; in that impregnable tower before the enemy, from which hung a thousand bucklers and all the armor of the strong; in that garden enclosed on all sides, which cannot be violated or corrupted by any deceitful plots; in that resplendent city of God, which has its foundations on the holy mountains; in that most august temple of God, which, radiant with divine splendours, is full of the glory of God; and in very many other biblical types of this kind."

The bull recounts that the Fathers interpreted the angel's address to Mary, "highly favoured one" or "full of grace", as indicating that "she was never subject to the curse and was, together with her Son, the only partaker of perpetual benediction"; they "frequently compare her to Eve while yet a virgin, while yet innocence, while yet incorrupt, while not yet deceived by the deadly snares of the most treacherous serpent".

==Patronages==

A number of countries are considered to be under the patronage of the Immaculate Conception by pontifical decree.

These include Argentina, Brazil, Ireland, Korea, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Philippines, Portugal, Spain (old kingdoms and the present state), the United States and Uruguay.

==Other churches==
For differing reasons, belief in Mary's immaculate conception in the Catholic doctrinal form is not part of the official doctrines of the Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Anglican and Protestant churches.

===Anglicanism===
Belief in Mary's immaculate conception is not a doctrine within Anglicanism, although it is shared by many Anglo-Catholics. Our Lady Saint Mary by J.G.H. Barry, 2008, ISBN 0-554-24332-6, pages 25-27 In the Church of England's Common Worship prayer book, 8 December is designated a Lesser Festival of the Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary (without the adjective "immaculate"). Common Worship: Festivals (Church House Publishing, Church of England ISBN 978-0-7151-2114-6), p. 20 

The report "Mary: Faith and Hope in Christ", by the Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission, concluded that the teaching about Mary in the two definitions of the Assumption and the Immaculate Conception can be said to be consonant with the teaching of the Scriptures and the ancient common traditions. Ecumenical Affairs - Dialogues - Anglican Roman Catholic Paragraph 78 - Accessed 8 December 2008 But the report expressed concerns that the Roman Catholic dogmatic definitions of these concepts implies them to be "revealed by God", stating: "The question arises for Anglicans, however, as to whether these doctrines concerning Mary are revealed by God in a way which must be held by believers as a matter of faith." Ecumenical Affairs - Dialogues - Anglican Roman Catholic Paragraph 60 - Accessed 8 December 2008 

Some Anglicans reject the doctrine that Mary was sinless and conceived without original sin, often citing that it is not within the Holy Scripture and is against the Redemptive role and purpose of Jesus Christ merited for all human beings.

===Eastern and Oriental Orthodox===
The Immaculate Conception is also portrayed by artists in the Orthodox Church, for example Holy Mary in Perlez, Vojvodina, Serbia.

Eastern Orthodox Christians object to the dogmatic declaration of her immaculate conception as an "over-elaboration" of the faith and because they see it as too closely connected with a particular interpretation the doctrine of ancestral sin. John Meyendorff, The Orthodox Church: Its Past and Its Role in the World Today (St Vladimir's Seminary Press 1996 ISBN 978-0-913836-81-1), p. 181 

In the tradition of Ethiopian Orthodoxy, the Kebra Nagast says:

===Old Catholic===
While Old Catholics do not reject the Immaculate Conception of Mary, and some of their parishes venerate Mary as immaculately conceived and celebrate the feast of her Immaculate Conception, they do not accept its definition as a dogma, since they reject papal infallibility and with it the Pope's authority to define dogma. 

===Protestantism===
Martin Luther, who initiated the Protestant Reformation, said: "Mary is full of grace, proclaimed to be entirely without sin. God's grace fills her with everything good and makes her devoid of all evil." Luther's Works, American edition, vol. 43, p. 40, ed. H. Lehmann, Fortress, 1968 But in 1532 he denied Mary's immaculate conception, declaring: "Mary is conceived in sin just like us." Gregory Lee Jackson Catholic, Lutheran, Protestant: A Doctrinal Comparison ( 1993 ISBN 978-0-615-16635-3), p. 249 However, some Lutherans, such as the members of the Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church, support the doctrine.

Most Protestants reject the doctrine because they do not consider the development of dogmatic theology to be authoritative apart from biblical exegesis, and because the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception is not taught in the Bible. The Protestant faith by George Wolfgang Forell 1962 ISBN 0-8006-1095-4 page 23 The formal pronouncement of Mary's Immaculate Conception by the Catholic Church in 1854 alienated some Protestant churches partly due to its implication that not all have sinned. Jesus in history, thought, and culture: an encyclopedia, Volume 1 by James Leslie Houlden 2003 ISBN 1-57607-856-6 page 

==Islam==
Manuscript of Chapter 19 (Sūratu Maryam) from a 9th-century Qur'an, Turkey.
Official Islamic teachings highly regard the Virgin Mary as both a sublime model of purity and piety. An entire Sura chapter of the Qur'an is dedicated to her nobility, holiness, and fiat obedience to God the Father. Among Islamic circles and discussions, she is often given a prominent status being the supreme feminine model of sanctity and maternal virtue.

Some Western writers claim that the immaculate conception of Mary is a teaching of Islam. Thus, commenting in 1734 on the passage in the Qur'an, "I have called her Mary; and I commend her to thy protection, and also her issue, against Satan driven away with stones", George Sale stated: "It is not improbable that the pretended immaculate conception of the virgin Mary is intimated in this passage. For according to a tradition of Mohammed, every person that comes into the world, is touched at his birth by the devil, and therefore cries out, Mary and her son only excepted; between whom, and the evil spirit God placed a veil, so that his touch did not reach them. And for this reason they say, neither of them were guilty of any sin, like the rest of the children of Adam." George Sale, Koran, commonly called the Alcoran of Mohammed, chapter 3, p. 39 

In addition, further claims aimed that the Roman Catholic Church derives its doctrine from the Islamic teaching. In volume 5 of his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, published in 1788, Edward Gibbon wrote: "The Latin Church has not disdained to borrow from the Koran the immaculate conception of his virgin mother." That he was speaking of her immaculate conception by her mother, not of her own virginal conception of Jesus, is shown by his footnote: "In the xiith century the immaculate conception was condemned by St. Bernard as a presumptuous novelty." Edward Gibbon, The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. V, chapter 50 In the aftermath of the definition of the dogma in 1854, this charge was repeated: "Strange as it may appear, that the doctrine which the church of Rome has promulgated, with so much pomp and ceremony, 'for the destruction of all heresies, and the confirmation of the faith of her adherents', should have its origin in the Mohametan Bible; yet the testimony of such authorities as Gibbon, and Sale, and Forster, and Gagnier, and Maracci, leave no doubt as to the marvellous fact." The Evangelical Repository and United Presbyterian Review (Philadelphia 1865), vol. XLII, p. 433 

Without making Islamic belief the origin of the doctrine defined in 1854, a similarity between the two has been noted also by Roman Catholic writers such as Thomas Patrick Hughes, Thomas Patrick Hughes, A Dictionary of Islam. First published London 1885; reprinted by Asian Educational Services 2001. ISBN 8120606728, ISBN 9788120606722. Entry "IMMACULATE CONCEPTION". (Google Books) Quote: "This doctrine was asserted by Muhammad (Mishkāt, book i., ch. iii., pt. 1)." William Bernard Ullathorne, William Bernard Ullathorne. The Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God: An Exposition. First published 1855; ISBN 111089977. Chapter XIV, "Mahomet and Martin Luther". (Google Books) Giancarlo Finazzo. Giancarlo Finazzo. "The Virgin Mary in the Koran". L'Osservatore Romano Weekly Edition in English, 13 April 1978, page 4. Quote: "The dogma of the Immaculate Conception ... is univocally recognized by the Islamic religion." 

Certain books that speak of the "immaculate conception" in relation to Islam confuse this term with the virgin birth of Jesus, his conception by Mary, not Mary's own conception by her mother. Khwaja Nazir Ahmad, Jesus in Heaven on Earth, chapter 8 Roy Jackson, Mawlana Mawdudi and Political Islam (Routledge 2011 ISBN 0-203-84872-1), p. 180 Abdelwahab Bouhdiba, Muḥammad Maʻrūf Dawālībī, The Different Aspects of Islamic Culture (Bernan Associates 1998 ISBN 978-92-3-102742-0), p. 264 Among writers who do not mistake Mary's "immaculate conception" as her virginal conception of Jesus, some say that Mary "is credited in Islam with extraordinary holiness, herself immaculately conceived", Juan Eduardo Campo, Encyclopedia of Islam (Infobase Publishing 2009 ISBN 978-1-43812696-8), p. 559 while others say that, "with regard to Mary's putative immaculate conception, while classical Islam holds the Qur'an to affirm Mary virginity and virtue, it repudiates the doctrine as it is known in Christianity. There is no inherited fault in the genesis of humans that requires any further form of salvation than moral repentance and an interior act of commitment and surrender." Cleo McNelly Kearns, The Virgin Mary, Monotheism and Sacrifice (Cambridge University Press 2008 ISBN 978-0-52187156-3), p. 254 

==Prayers and hymns==
The Roman Missal and the Roman Rite Liturgy of the Hours naturally includes references to Mary's immaculate conception in the feast of the Immaculate Conception. An example is the antiphon that begins: "Tota pulchra es, Maria, et macula originalis non est in te" (You are all beautiful, Mary, and the original stain sin is not in you. Your clothing is white as snow, and your face is like the sun. You are all beautiful, Mary, and the original stain sin is not in you. You are the glory of Jerusalem, you are the joy of Israel, you give honour to our people. You are all beautiful, Mary.) The text (in Latin) is given at Tota Pulchra Es - GMEA Honor Chorus. On the basis of the original Gregorian chant music, Tota pulchra es Maria, Canto gregoriano polyphonic settings have been composed by Anton Bruckner, Anton Bruckner - Tota pulchra es Pablo Casals, Maurice Duruflé, Maurice Duruflé: Tota pulchra es Maria Grzegorz Gerwazy Gorczycki, Poznańskie Słowiki - Tota pulchra es ( G. G. Gorczycki) Gjeilo], Tota pulchra es, Grex Vocalis José Maurício Nunes Garcia, José Maurício Nunes Garcia and Nikolaus Schapfl, Tota Pulchra - Composed by Nikolaus Schapfl 

Other prayers honouring Mary's immaculate conception are in use outside the formal liturgy. The hymn Immaculate Mary, addressed to Mary as the Immaculately Conceived One, is closely associated with Lourdes. Immaculate prayers The Immaculata prayer, composed by Saint Maximillian Kolbe, is a prayer of entrustment to Mary as the Immaculata. University of Dayton Marian prayers A novena of prayers, with a specific prayer for each of the nine days has been composed under the title of the Immaculate Conception Novena. EWTN Immaculate Conception Novena 

==Artistic representations==

Swiss emblem 16th century
The 1476 extension of the feast of the Immaculate Conception to the entire Latin Church reduced the likelihood of controversy for the artist or patron in depicting an image, so that emblems depicting The Immaculate Conception began to appear. Emblems for Immaculate Conception 

Many artists in the 15th century faced the problem of how to depict an abstract idea such as the Immaculate Conception, and the problem was not fully solved for 150 years. The Italian Renaissance artist Piero di Cosimo was among those artists who tried new solutions, but none of these became generally adopted so that the subject matter would be immediately recognisable to the faithful.

The definitive iconography for the Immaculate Conception, drawing on the emblem tradition, seems to have been finally established by the master and then father-in-law of Diego Velázquez, the painter and theorist Francisco Pacheco. Pacheco's iconography influenced other Spanish artists such as Bartolomé Murillo, Diego Velázquez, and Francisco Zurbarán, who each produced a number of artistic masterpieces based on the use of these same symbols. Ésotérisme, gnoses & imaginaire symbolique: mélanges offerts à Antoine Faivre by Richard Caron, Antoine Faivre 2001 ISBN 90-429-0955-2 page 676 Divine Mirrors: The Virgin Mary in the Visual Arts by Melissa R. Katz and Robert A. Orsi 2001 ISBN 0-19-514557-7 page 98 

The popularity of this particular representation of The Immaculate Conception spread across the rest of Europe, and has since remained the best known artistic depiction of the concept: in a heavenly realm, moments after her creation, the spirit of Mary (in the form of a young woman) looks up in awe at (or bows her head to) God. The moon is under her feet and a halo of twelve stars surround her head, possibly a reference to "a woman clothed with the sun" from Revelation 12:1-2. Additional imagery may include clouds, a golden light, and cherubs. In some paintings the cherubim are holding lilies and roses, flowers often associated with Mary. Our Lady in Art by Katherine Lee Rawlings Jenner 2009 ISBN 1-103-32689-9 pages 3-9 

==Gallery==

File:Piero di Cosimo 057.jpg|di Cosimo Immaculate Conception, 1505
File:0 L'Immaculée Conception - P.P. Rubens - Prado - P1627 - (2).JPG|Rubens Immaculate Conception 1628-1629
File:Zurbaran - Inmaculada Concepcion.jpg|Zurbarán Immaculate Conception, 1630
File:Inmaculada Concepcion (La Colosal).jpg|Murillo Immaculate Conception, 1650
File:Imaculada - Murillo.jpg|Murillo Immaculate Conception, 1660
File:La Inmaculada de Soult, 1678, Bartolomé E. Murillo.jpg|Murillo Immaculate Conception, 1678
File:Maratta.jpg|Carlo Maratta, 1689
File:Juan Antonio de Frías y Escalante. Inmaculada Concepción.jpg|Juan Antonio Escalante 17th century
File:Roma-santa maria degli angeli.jpg|Santa Maria degli Angeli, Rome
File:Igreja Matriz Altar lateral Senhora da Conceição.JPG|Baroque altar in Our Lady of the Immaculate Conception Church, Portugal
File:Museu Municipal de Caxias do Sul - Imaculada Conceição.jpg|Caxias do Sul museum, Brazil
File:Igreja da Conceição 06.jpg|Statue, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 19th century
File:Immacolata Palmi (RC).jpg|Palmi, Immaculate Conception, 1925
File:Virgen del Trono.jpg|Nicaragua Immaculate Conception, 1950
File:Impong Maria (Iglesia Fiilipina Independiente).jpg| La Purisima Concepcion / Impong Maria, Iglesia Filipina Independiente, Malabon
File:La Immaculada Concepcion, Malabon.jpg |La Immaculada Concepcion (Canonical Crowned), 
File:InmaculadaConcepcionngMaynilaFilipinas2012.jpg|La Inmaculada, Manila Cathedral
File:NS Aparecida.png|Our Lady of Aparecida, Brasilia

==See also==
Immaculate Conception celebration in Guatemala.

* Patronages of the Immaculate Conception
* Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception
* Congregation of the Immaculate Conception
* Feast of the Immaculate Conception
* Immaculate Mary
* Immaculata prayer
* Marian doctrines of the Catholic Church
* Mother of God (Roman Catholic)
* Original sin
* Perpetual virginity of Mary
* Roman Catholic Marian art
* Virgin birth of Jesus

==Bibliography==
* Le Franc, Martin. The Conception of Mary -- A Rhyming Translation of Book V of Le Champion des Dames by Martin Le Franc (1410-1461). Ed. and trans. Steven Millen Taylor. Lewiston, NY: The Edwin Mellen Press, 2010.

==References==

==External links==

* The Immaculate Conception in Art (Painting) 
* Ineffabilis Deus (Apostolic Constitution of Pope Pius IX defining the dogma of the Immaculate Conception)
* Godzinki: The Little Hours of the Immaculate Conception
* St. Alphonsus Liguori's writing on the Immaculate Conception in his book The Glories of Mary
* Catholic Encyclopedia entry on the Immaculate Conception
* Catholic Encyclopedia entry on Original Sin
* The Immaculate Conception. A study by a Melkite archimandrite
*The Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God based on Juniper Carol's Mariology and William Bernard Ullathornee's book
* "St. Augustine and Original Sin" — a short article on the different understandings of Original Sin in Eastern and Western Christianity, without distinguishing Protestant theology from Roman Catholic. The latter holds that "original sin does not have the character of a personal fault in any of Adam's descendants" (Catechism of the Catholic Church, 405).
*Mark I. Miraville (editor), "Mariology: A Guide for Priests, Deacons, Seminarians, and Consecrated Persons
* Original Sin According To St. Paul by John S. Romanides
* Catechism of the Catholic Church "Conceived by the Power of the Holy Spirit and Born of the Virgin Mary"


