[[John Hay]]

John Milton Hay (October 8, 1838 – July 1, 1905) was an American statesman, diplomat, author, journalist, and private secretary and assistant to Abraham Lincoln. Hay's highest office was serving as United States Secretary of State under Presidents William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt.

==Early life==
John Milton Hay was born in Salem, Indiana on October 8, 1838. He was the third son of Dr. Charles Hay and the former Helen Leonard. John Hay's paternal grandfather, also named John, had emigrated from Berkeley County, Virginia (today in West Virginia) in 1775, settling in Lexington, Kentucky where he had 14 children. Both Charles and his father hated slavery, and separately moved to the North in the early 1830s; the elder John Hay went to Springfield, Illinois, where he became a good friend of local lawyer Abraham Lincoln. Charles, a doctor, practiced in Salem and married there in 1831. Helen's father, David Leonard, had moved his family west from Assonet, Massachusetts in 1818, but died en route to Vincennes, Indiana, and Helen relocated to Salem in 1830 to teach school. Charles was not successful in Salem, and borrowed money to move, with his wife and children, to Warsaw, Illinois in 1841.

In Warsaw, a Southern Illinois town opposite the confluence of the Mississippi and Des Moines rivers, the Hay family lived a difficult pioneer existence. Warsaw, like the other towns in which John Hay spent his childhood, had been settled by New Englanders, and was anti-slavery. John attended the local schools, and in 1849 his uncle Milton Hay invited the precocious child to live with him in Pittsfield, Pike County, and attend a well-regarded local academy. Milton, a lawyer, was also a friend of Lincoln, who had by then served in Congress. Once he had completed his studies there, John, at age 13, was sent to live with his grandfather in Springfield, and attend Illinois State University. This was at the time little more than a high school. Once John's studies were done there, he returned to Warsaw, and his parents and uncle Milton (who financed the boy's education) decided to send him to Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, alma mater of his late maternal grandmother.

At Brown, Hay joined Theta Delta Chi and Phi Beta Kappa. He also developed an interest in poetry, and became a part of Providence's literary circle which included Sarah Helen Whitman and Nora Perry. As a salutation to each issue of Benjamin Tucker's Liberty, these lines of poetry by Hay were printed: For always in thine eyes, O Liberty!/ Shines that high light whereby the world is saved;/ And though thou slay us, we will trust in thee.

When he graduated, he was named Class Poet. He graduated in 1858 with a master of arts degree and went home to Warsaw to study law with his uncle, Milton Hay. "Hay, John" Encyclopedia Brunoniana William Roscoe Thayer, John Hay: In Two Volumes, Volume 1, 1915, page 49 J. Robert Moskin, American Statecraft: The Story of the U.S. Foreign Service, 2013, page 208 

===Legal career===
In 1861, he was admitted to practice in the Supreme Court of Illinois.

===Lincoln's secretary===
Abraham Lincoln's law office was next door to the law office of Milton Hay, and Lincoln thus became acquainted with John Hay. When Lincoln won election as president, his secretary, John G. Nicolay, recommended John Hay to Lincoln as assistant private secretary. Though on the government payroll as a clerk in the Interior Department because the president wasn't authorized to employ a second secretary, Hay served Lincoln until 1864. He lived in the northeast corner bedroom on the second floor of the White House, which he shared with his fellow secretary and Pittsfield Academy schoolmate, Nicolay.

For a few months, he served in the Union Army under Generals David Hunter and Quincy Adams Gillmore. He rose to the rank of major and was later brevetted lieutenant colonel and colonel. Hay's diary and writings during the Civil War are basic historical sources. Some have credited him with being the real author of Lincoln's Letter to Mrs. Bixby, consoling her for the loss of her sons in the war. American Heritage magazine 

Hay was present when Lincoln died after being shot at Ford's Theatre. Hay and Nicolay wrote a formal 10-volume biography of Lincoln (Abraham Lincoln: A History, 1890) and prepared an edition of his collected works.

Portions of Hay's diaries and letters from 1861–1870, published in the book Lincoln and the Civil War, show Lincoln in a far more intimate light.

John Hay as a young man

===Diplomatic career===
Between 1865 and 1870, he was secretary of legation at Paris (1865–7) and Madrid (1867–8), and chargé d'affaires at Vienna (1868–70). In 1878 he became assistant secretary of state in the Hayes administration. Hay was named U.S. ambassador to the United Kingdom in 1897 when William McKinley became President. Some of the recognition of the longstanding community of interests between the United Kingdom and the United States was the result of Hay's diplomatic tenure. 

===Journalism career===
In 1870 he left government and worked for 6 years as an editor for the New York Tribune under Whitelaw Reid. 

===Secretary of State===
In August 1898, Hay was named by President McKinley as Secretary of State and helped negotiate the Treaty of Paris of 1898, which ended the Spanish–American War. He was involved in the Perdicaris incident.

Hay continued serving as Secretary of State after Theodore Roosevelt succeeded McKinley, serving until his own death in 1905. He established the Open Door Policy in China.

==Legacy==
His contributions included the adoption of an Open Door Policy in China (announced on January 2, 1900) and the preparations for the Panama Canal. He negotiated the Hay–Pauncefote Treaty (1901), the Hay–Herrán Treaty (1903), and the Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty (1903), all of which were instrumental in clearing the way for the construction and use of the Canal. In all, he brought about more than 50 treaties, including the settlement of the Samoan dispute, as a result of which the United States secured Tutuila, with a harbor in the Pacific; a definitive Alaskan boundary treaty in 1903; the negotiation of reciprocity treaties with Argentina, France, Germany, Cuba, and the British West Indies; the negotiation of new treaties with Spain; and the negotiation of a treaty with Denmark for the cession of the Danish West India Islands. New International Encyclopedia. 
Hay in portrait by John Singer Sargent
In 1904, Hay was one of the first seven chosen for membership in the American Academy of Arts and Letters.

Hay is also known for his comment, written in a letter to President Theodore Roosevelt, describing the Spanish–American War as a "splendid little war".

Hay appears as a prominent character in Gore Vidal's historical novels Lincoln and Empire and in William Safire's historical novel Freedom. He appears, portrayed by John Huston, in the 1975 film The Wind and the Lion, a fictionalization of the Perdicaris Affair in Morocco in 1904. Steven Culp portrayed John ("Johnny") Hay in the 1988 miniseries Lincoln, based on Vidal's book. He is portrayed in the 1997 miniseries Rough Riders by actor and retired United States Marine R. Lee Ermey. In the 2012 motion picture Lincoln he is played by actor Joseph Cross and is seemingly still Lincoln's assistant secretary despite the events of the film taking place entirely in 1865 (Hay held the position until 1864), although his position is never overtly stated.

After Roosevelt signed an executive order setting aside land in the Benguet region of the Philippines for a military reservation under the United States Army, Camp John Hay of Baguio City was established on October 25, 1903 and named in his honor. It was re-designated John Hay Air Base in 1955. The base was used for rest and recreation for U.S. military personnel and the dependants of U.S. military personnel in the Philippines as well as Department of Defense employees and their dependents. The 690-hectare property was finally turned over to the Philippines in 1991 upon the expiration of the Philippine-U.S. Bases Agreement. Since 1997 it has been in the hands of a private developer, on a long-term lease, which has transformed the property into a world class resort.

The mountain resort still carries John Hay's name to this day.

Hay was a close friend of Henry Brooks Adams, American historian and author. In 1884, architect Henry Hobson Richardson designed adjoining townhouses for Hay and Adams on Lafayette Square in Washington, D.C. The houses were demolished in 1927 and the site is now occupied by the Hay–Adams Hotel.
Posthumous bust of John Hay (1915–17), by J. Massey Rhind, inside the National McKinley Birthplace Memorial.
Brown University's John Hay Library housed the entire library collection from its construction in 1910 until the John D. Rockefeller, Jr. Library was built in 1964. In 1971, when physical science materials were transferred to the new Sciences Library, the John Hay Library became exclusively a repository for the library's Special Collections.

Hay's New Hampshire estate has been conserved as part of the John Hay National Wildlife Refuge, the Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests' John Hay Land Studies Center, and The Garden Conservancy's Fells Reservation. The Fells, a local nonprofit organization that has maintained and managed the John Hay Estate on Lake Sunapee for over a decade, acquired the northern half of the property from the US Fish and Wildlife Service on March 25, 2008.

Hay and Abraham Lincoln are depicted in a larger-than-life bronze sculpture by Mark Martino, entitled A Learning Moment, in the Sesquicentennial Plaza at Carthage College. Hay was an alumnus of the Illinois State University in Springfield (previously Hillsboro College), which later became Carthage College when it moved to Carthage, Illinois in 1870.

Hay was a correspondent member of the Brazilian Academy of Letters from 1900 until his death.

He received honorary Doctor of Laws degrees from: Case Western Reserve University (1894); Brown University (1897); Princeton University (1901); Dartmouth College (1901); Yale University (1901); and Harvard University (1902). Lorenzo Sears, John Hay, Author and Statesman, 1915, page 22 

John Hay High School, built in 1927, is on Cleveland's east side, in the University Circle area.

==Personal life==
Hay married Clara Stone, daughter of Amasa Stone of Cleveland, Ohio, an American industrialist who built railroads and invested in mills in Ohio. They are buried together in Lake View Cemetery in Cleveland, Ohio. Their daughter Helen Julia Hay, a writer and poet, married Payne Whitney of the influential Whitney family; their children were U.S. ambassador John Hay Whitney and Joan Whitney Payson.

Hay and Hillary Rodham Clinton are the only Secretaries of State to have resided in the White House prior to becoming Secretary of State.

==Books by Hay==
* Abraham Lincoln: A History (with John G. Nicolay, (10 vol. 1890)
* The Bread-winners (1883), a novel
* Castilian Days (1875)
* Pike County Ballads and Other Poems (1871)
* Poems (1890)

==References==

==Bibliography==

*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
* Taliaferro, John. All the Great Prizes: The Life of John Hay, From Lincoln to Roosevelt (Simon & Schuster; 2013) 673 pages; 
*Warren Zimmermann, First Great Triumph: How Five Americans Made Their Country a World Power (New York, 2002)
*GianPaolo Ferraioli, L'Italia e l'ascesa degli Stati Uniti al rango di potenza mondiale (1896-1909). Diplomazia, dibattito pubblico, emigrazione durante le amministrazioni di William McKinley e Theodore Roosevelt, Napoli, Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane, 2013.

==External links==

*
*John Hay Biography
*John Hay, Abraham Lincoln's friend
*Camp John Hay Resort
*
*John Hay Land Studies Center
*John Hay National Wildlife Refuge
*The Fells Reservation

 
 

 
 

 
 


