[[John Everett Millais]]

Sir John Everett Millais, 1st Baronet, PRA (; 8 June 1829 – 13 August 1896) was an English painter and illustrator who was one of the founders of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.

A child prodigy, at the age of 11 he became the youngest student to enter the Royal Academy Schools. The Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood was founded at his parents' house in London. Millais became the most famous exponent of the style, his painting Christ in the House of his Parents (1850) generating considerable controversy. By the late 1850s Millais was moving away from the Pre-Raphaelite style. His later works were enormously successful, making Millais one of the wealthiest artists of his day. However, they have typically been viewed by 20th century critics as failures. This view has changed in recent decades, as his later works have come to be seen in the context of wider changes in the art world.

Millais' personal life has also played a significant role in his reputation. His wife Effie was formerly married to the critic John Ruskin, who had supported Millais' early work. The annulment of the marriage and her marriage of Millais have sometimes been linked to his change of style.

==Early life==
Millais was born in Southampton, England in 1829, of a prominent Jersey-based family. His parents were John William Millais and Emily Mary Millais. Most of his early childhood was spent in Jersey, to which he retained a strong devotion throughout his life. The author Thackeray once asked him "when England conquered Jersey." Millais replied "Never! Jersey conquered England." cited in Chums annual, 1896, page 213 The family moved to Dinan in Brittany for a few years in his childhood.

His mother's "forceful personality" was the most powerful influence on his early life. She had a keen interest in art and music, and encouraged her son's artistic bent, promoting the relocating of the family to London to help develop contacts at the Royal Academy of Art. He later said "I owe everything to my mother". J. N. P. Watson, Millais: three generations in nature, art & sport, Sportsman's Press, 1988, p.10 His prodigious artistic talent won him a place at the Royal Academy schools at the unprecedented age of eleven. While there, he met William Holman Hunt and Dante Gabriel Rossetti with whom he formed the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood (known as the "PRB") in September 1848 in his family home on Gower Street, off Bedford Square.

==Pre-Raphaelite works==
Photograph of Millais, c. 1854
Millais's Christ in the House of His Parents (1850) was highly controversial because of its realistic portrayal of a working class Holy Family labouring in a messy carpentry workshop. Later works were also controversial, though less so. Millais achieved popular success with A Huguenot (1852), which depicts a young couple about to be separated because of religious conflicts. He repeated this theme in many later works. All these early works were painted with great attention to detail, often concentrating on the beauty and complexity of the natural world. In paintings such as Ophelia (1852) Millais created dense and elaborate pictorial surfaces based on the integration of naturalistic elements. This approach has been described as a kind of "pictorial eco-system".

This style was promoted by the critic John Ruskin, who had defended the Pre-Raphaelites against their critics. Millais's friendship with Ruskin introduced him to Ruskin's wife Effie. Soon after they met she modelled for his painting The Order of Release. As Millais painted Effie they fell in love. Despite having been married to Ruskin for several years, Effie was still a virgin. Her parents realised something was wrong and she filed for an annulment.

===Family===
Photo assemblage of Millais' family circa 1870 (compiled by Emily Fane de Salis). Left to right: Top line Everett Millais; Mrs Emily Millais; Middle line: J.E, Millais, John Guille Millais; Effie Millais; Bottom line: Caroline Alice Millais
In 1855, after her marriage to Ruskin was annulled, Effie and John Millais married. He and Effie eventually had eight children: Everett, born in 1856; George, born in 1857; Effie, born in 1858; Mary, born in 1860; Alice, Later Alice Stuart-Wortley, she was a friend of the composer Edward Elgar, called by him "Windflower" born in 1862; Geoffroy, born in 1863; John in 1865; and Sophie in 1868. Their youngest son, John Guille Millais, became a notable naturalist and wildlife artist.

Effie's younger sister Sophy Gray sat for several pictures by Millais, prompting some speculation about the nature of their apparently fond relationship. Suzanne Fagence Cooper (2010) The Model Wife 

===Later works===
After his marriage, Millais began to paint in a broader style, which was condemned by Ruskin as "a catastrophe". It has been argued that this change of style resulted from Millais's need to increase his output to support his growing family. Unsympathetic critics such as William Morris accused him of "selling out" to achieve popularity and wealth. His admirers, in contrast, pointed to the artist's connections with Whistler and Albert Moore, and influence on John Singer Sargent. Millais himself argued that as he grew more confident as an artist, he could paint with greater boldness. In his article "Thoughts on our art of Today" (1888) he recommended Velázquez and Rembrandt as models for artists to follow. Paintings such as The Eve of St. Agnes and The Somnambulist clearly show an ongoing dialogue between the artist and Whistler, whose work Millais strongly supported. Other paintings of the late 1850s and 1860s can be interpreted as anticipating aspects of the Aesthetic Movement. Many deploy broad blocks of harmoniously arranged colour and are symbolic rather than narratival. From 1862, the Millais family lived at 7 Cromwell Place, Kensington, London. 
Blue Plaque, 7 Cromwell Place, Kensington

Later works, from the 1870s onwards demonstrate Millais's reverence for Old Masters such as Joshua Reynolds and Velázquez. Many of these paintings were of an historical theme and were further examples of Millais's talent. Notable among these are The Two Princes Edward and Richard in the Tower (1878) depicting the Princes in the Tower, The Northwest Passage (1874) and the Boyhood of Raleigh (1871). Such paintings indicate Millais's interest in subjects connected to Britain's history and expanding empire. Millais also achieved great popularity with his paintings of children, notably Bubbles (1886) – famous, or perhaps notorious, for being used in the advertising of Pears soap – and Cherry Ripe. His last project (1896) was to be a painting entitled The Last Trek. Based on his illustration for his son's book, it depicted a white hunter lying dead in the African veldt, his body contemplated by two Africans.

== Landscapes 1870–92 ==
Millais later in his career.
This fascination with wild and bleak locations is also evident in his many landscape paintings of this period, which usually depict difficult or dangerous terrain. The first of these, Chill October (1870) was painted in Perth, near his wife's family home. Chill October (Collection of Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber), was the first of the large-scale Scottish Landscapes Millais painted periodically throughout his later career. Usually autumnal and often bleakly unpicturesque, they evoke a mood of melancholy and sense of transience that recalls his cycle-of-nature paintings of the later 1850s, especially Autumn Leaves (Manchester Art Gallery) and The Vale of Rest (Tate Britain), though with little or no direct symbolism or human activity to point to their meaning. In 1870 Millais returned to full landscape pictures, and over the next twenty years painted a number of scenes of Perthshire where he was annually found hunting and fishing from August until late into the autumn each year. Most of these landscapes are autumnal or early winter in season and show bleak, dank, water fringed bog or moor, loch and riverside. Millais never returned to "blade by blade" landscape painting, nor to the vibrant greens of his own outdoor work in the early fifties, although the assured handling of his broader freer, later style is equally accomplished in its close observation of scenery. Many were painted elsewhere in Perthshire, near Dunkeld and Birnam, where Millais rented grand houses each autumn to hunt and fish. Christmas Eve, his first full landscape snow scene, painted in 1887, was a view looking towards Murthly castle.

===Illustrations===
Millais was also very successful as a book illustrator, notably for the works of Anthony Trollope and the poems of Tennyson. His complex illustrations of the parables of Jesus were published in 1864. His father-in-law commissioned stained-glass windows based on them for Kinnoull parish church, Perth. He also provided illustrations for magazines such as Good Words. In 1869 he was recruited as an artist for the newly founded weekly newspaper The Graphic. As a young man Millais frequently went on sketching expeditions to Keston and Hayes. Whilst there he painted a sign for an inn where he used to stay, near to Hayes church (cited in Chums annual, 1896, page 213).

==Academic career==
John Everett Millais by Thomas Brock at Tate Britain
Millais was elected as an associate member of the Royal Academy of Arts in 1853, and was soon elected as a full member of the Academy, in which he was a prominent and active participant. He was created a Baronet, of Palace Gate, in the
parish of St Mary Abbot, Kensington, in the county of Middlesex, and of Saint Ouen, in
the Island of Jersey, in 1885, the first artist to be honoured with a Hereditary Title. After the death of Lord Leighton in 1896, Millais was elected President of the Royal Academy, but he died later in the same year from throat cancer. He was buried in St Paul's Cathedral.

==Memorial statue==
When Millais died in 1896, the Prince of Wales (later to become King Edward VII) chaired a memorial committee, which commissioned a statue of the artist. Birchall, Heather. "Sir Thomas Brock 1847–1922", Tate online, February 2002. Retrieved 5 April 2008. This was installed at the front of the National Gallery of British Art (now Tate Britain) in the garden on the east side in 1905. On 23 November that year, the Pall Mall Gazette called it "a breezy statue, representing the man in the characteristic attitude in which we all knew him". 

In 1953, Tate Director, Sir Norman Reid, attempted to have it replaced by Auguste Rodin's John the Baptist, and in 1962 again proposed its removal, calling its presence "positively harmful". His efforts were frustrated by the statue's owner, the Ministry of Works. Ownership was transferred from the Ministry to English Heritage in 1996, and by them in turn to the Tate. In 2000, under Stephen Deuchar's directorship, the statue was removed to the rear of the building. 

==Media==
Millais's relationship with Ruskin and Effie has been the subject of several dramas, beginning with the silent film The Love of John Ruskin from 1912. There have also been stage and radio plays and an opera. An upcoming film, Effie, written by Emma Thompson, features Tom Sturridge as Millais.

The PRB as a whole have been the subjects of two BBC period dramas. The first, entitled The Love School, was shown in 1975, starring Peter Egan as Millais. The second was Desperate Romantics, in which Millais is played by Samuel Barnett. It was first broadcast on BBC 2 Tuesday, 21 July 2009. 

In 2004, the artists Hamilton and Ashrowan produced a work referencing Millais's landscape painting The Sound of Many Waters (1876). Millais and The Sound of Many Waters by Dr. Ailsa Boyd, hamiltonashrowan.com, retrieved 3 March 2011 The work was filmed at Rumbling Bridge on the River Braan in Perthshire, the site where Millais made the painting. It consisted of a 32 screen moving image installation at Perth Concert Hall, including a film of the Millais painting. Video documentation ashrowan.com, retrieved 3 March 2011 

==Selected works in museums==
*The Blind Girl: Birmingham Museum & Art Gallery
*Pizarro Seizing the Inca of Peru Tage.org.uk Tate
*The Two Princes Edward and Richard in the Tower: Picture Gallery of Royal Holloway College

== Gallery ==

Image:Pizarro Seizing the Inca of Peru.jpg|Pizarro Seizing the Inca of Peru (1846), Victoria and Albert Museum, London
Image:Benjamin Seizes Daughter of Shiloh.jpg|The Tribe of Benjamin Seizing the Daughters of Shiloh (1847)
Image:John Everett Millais - Isabella.jpg|Isabella (1849) Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool
File:Huguenot lovers on St. Bartholomew's Day.jpg|A Huguenot on St Bartholomew's Day (1852)
File:John Everett Millais - Christ in the House of His Parents (`The Carpenter's Shop') - Google Art Project.jpg|Christ in the House of His Parents (1850) Tate Britain, London
Image:Millais - Die Rückkehr der Taube zur Arche Noah.jpg|The Return of the Dove to the Ark (1851) Ashmolean Museum, Oxford
File:John Everett Millais - Ophelia - Google Art Project.jpg|Ophelia (1852) Tate Britain, London
Image:Millais ferdy.jpg|Ferdinand Lured by Ariel (1852)
Image:Millais Order of Release.jpg|The Order of Release (1853) Tate Britain, London
Image:Millais Royalist.jpg|The Proscribed Royalist, 1651 (1853)Lord Lloyd Webber
File:Millais Rescue.jpg|The Rescue (1855) National Gallery of Victoria
Image:Millais-Blind Girl.jpg|The Blind Girl (1856) Birmingham Museum & Art Gallery
Image:Peace concluded.jpg|Peace Concluded, 1856 (1856)Minneapolis Art Institute
Image:Millais leaves.jpg|Autumn Leaves (1856) Manchester Art Gallery
Image:ISUMBRAS.jpg|Sir Isumbras at the Ford (1857) Lady Lever Art Gallery
Image:Millais - Das Tal der Stille.jpg|The Vale of Rest (1858) Tate Britain, London
Image:John Everett Millais The Black Brunswicker.jpg|The Black Brunswicker (1860)
Image:Eve of St Agnes.jpg|The Eve of Saint Agnes (1863) HM The Queen
Image:John Everett Millais Leisure Hours.JPG|Leisure Hours, (1864), oil on canvas, Detroit Institute of Arts
image:esthermillais.jpg|Esther (1865) Private Collection
Image:Jephtha.jpg|Jephthah (1867) National Museum of Wales, Cardiff
Image:Millais Vanessa.jpg|Vanessa (1868) Liverpool Museums Service
Image:Lorne.jpg|Portrait of the Marquess of Lorne. National Gallery of Canada
Image:Millais Boyhood of Raleigh.jpg|The Boyhood of Raleigh (1871)
Image:VictoryOLord.JPG|Victory O Lord! (1871) Manchester Art Gallery
Image:EFFIE.jpg|Portrait of Effie Millais (1873) Perth Museum and Art Gallery
Image:princes.jpg|The Two Princes Edward and Richard in the Tower (1878)Picture Gallery of Royal Holloway College
Image:Millais - Überfahrt nach Nordwest.jpg|The Northwest Passage (1878) Tate Britain, London
Image:CherryRipe1879 by John Everett Millais.jpg|Cherry Ripe (1879) Private Collection
Image:John Henry Newman by Sir John Everett Millais, 1st Bt.jpg|John Henry Newman (1881) National Portrait Gallery (London)
Image:John everett millais ruling passion.jpg|The Ruling Passion (1885) Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum
Image:Bubbles by John Everett Millais.jpg|Bubbles (1886) Royal Academy of Arts
Image:RoseberyMillais.gif|Portrait of Archibald Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery
Image:Lillie Langtry by Millais.jpg|A Jersey Lily: Portrait of Lillie Langtry Jersey Museum Services
Image:Grey lady.JPG|The Grey Lady (1888) Private Collection
Image:Pearl of great price.jpg|The Pearl of Great Price, illustration from The Parables of Our Lord
Image:Effie Deans, 1877.jpg|Effie Deans Private Collection
Image:Millais - Self-Portrait.jpg|Self portrait Uffizi Portrait Collection Florence
Image:Millais Ruskin.jpg|John Ruskin (1853–54) Ashmolean Museum, Oxford
Image:The Knight Errant.jpg|The Knight Errant (1870)Tate Britain, London
Image:JOHN EVERETT MILLAIS - The Martyr of the Solway (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, c. 1871. Óleo sobre lienzo, 70.5 x 56.5 cm).jpg|The Martyr of the Solway (c. 1871)Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool
File:John Everett Millais - Chill October.JPG|Chill October 1870

==See also==
*British art
*English school of painting
*List of British painters
*List of paintings by John Everett Millais
*List of Pre-Raphaelite paintings – including John Everett Millais

==Notes and references==

==Further reading==
*
*Baldry, A. L. Sir John Everett Millais (London, G. Bell & Sons, 1908).
*Barlow, Paul Time Present and Time Past: The Art of John Everett Millais, Ashgate 2005.
*Bennett, Mary. Footnotes to the Millais Exhibition (Walker Art Gallery (Liverpool Bulletin, No 12 1967).
*Bennett, Mary (catalogue) (Walker Art Gallery and Royal Academy catalogue 1967).
*
*
*Eggeling, Dr Joe. Millais and Dunkeld The story of Millais's Landscapes (1985).
*Goldman, Paul. Beyond Decoration: the Illustrations of John Everett Millais. Pinner, Middlesex: Private Libraries Association, 2005
*Lutyens (ed). Millais and the Ruskins 1967.
*Lutyens, M. Letters from John Everett Millais, Bart P.R.A. and William Holman Hunt. O.M. (The Walpole Society, 1972-4).
*Mancoff, D. N. (ed). John Everett Millais beyond the Pre Raphaelite Brotherhood (Londom and New Haven, 2001).
*Millais, John Guille. The Life and Letters of John Everett Millais. Volume 1, Volume 2 (London: Methuen, 1899).
*National Portrait Gallery catalogue, 1999.
*Rosenfeld, Jason and Smith, Alison (Tate Britain catalogue, 2007).
*
*Spielmann, Marion. Notes on Millais Exhibition R.A. 1898.
*F.G. Stephens. Grosvenor 1886 Exhibition of the works of John Everett Millais, Bt (Notes from a catalogue, 1886)
*Warner, Malcolm. The Drawings of John Everett Millais (Arts council catalogue, 1979).
*

==External links==

* The Millais Site includes many pictures and a complete list of his works
* Birmingham Museums & Art Gallery's Pre-Raphaelite Online Resource includes almost two hundred paintings on canvas and works on paper by Millais
* ArtRenewal.org gallery
* National Museums Liverpool important Millais collection
* Edward Platt on Millais
* Kathleen Jamie on Millais
* Millais's Ophelia in focus on Tate Online
* John Everett Millais in the "History of Art"
* smARThistory: Christ in the House of His Parents and Ophelia – Short video podcasts about the paintings
* The Pre-Raph Pack Discover more about the artists, the techniques they used and a timeline spanning 100 years.


