[[Mardi Gras]]

Mardi Gras , also Fat Tuesday in English, refers to events of the Carnival celebrations, beginning on or after the Epiphany or Kings day and culminating on the day before Ash Wednesday. is French for "Fat Tuesday," reflecting the practice of the last night of eating richer, fatty foods before the ritual fasting of the Lenten season.

Related popular practices are associated with celebrations before the fasting and religious obligations associated with the penitential season of Lent. The date of Fat Tuesday coincides with that of celebrations of Shrove Tuesday, from the word shrive, meaning "confess." 

==Traditions==
Popular practices include wearing masks and costumes, overturning social conventions, dancing, sports competitions, parades, debauchery, etc. Similar expressions to Mardi Gras appear in other European languages sharing the Christian tradition, as it is associated with the religious requirement for confession before Lent begins.
In many areas, the term "Mardi Gras" has come to mean the whole period of activity related to the celebratory events, beyond just the single day. In some American cities, it is now called "Mardi Gras Day". 
 In London, Mardi Gras season: "Paul's Pastry Shop kneads a
 ton of dough in Picayune", Allbusiness.com, 2009, webpage:
 Allbusiness-35.
 
 In New Orleans, Mardi Gras season: "Mardi Gras in New
 Orleans | Metro.co.uk", Metro.co.uk, 2009, webpage;
 Metro.co.uk-2315.
 
 In Mobile, Mardi Gras season: "New Orleans has competition
 for Mardi Gras", USATODAY.com, February 2006, webpage:
 USATODAY-com-mardi.
 
 In San Diego, Mardi Gras season: "sandiego.com - Mardi
 Gras in San Diego: FAQ's", SanDiego.com, 2008, webpage:
 SanDiego.com-SD.
 
 In Texas, Mardi Gras season: "Let’s Celebrate: Mardi
 Gras 2008", Southernbyways.com, January 2008, webpage:
 southernbyways-com-TX.
 It also has become a single people's counter to the coupled-centric Valentine's Day. 
 In Texas, Mardi Gras season: "Let’s Celebrate: Mardi
 Gras 2008", Southernbyways.com, January 2008, webpage:
 southernbyways-com-TX.
 
The festival season varies from city to city, as some traditions consider Mardi Gras the entire period between Epiphany or Twelfth Night and Ash Wednesday. Others treat the final three-day period before Ash Wednesday as the Mardi Gras. In Mobile, Alabama, Mardi Gras-associated social events begin in November, followed by mystic society balls on Thanksgiving, 
 "Mobile Carnival Association, 1927",
 MardiGrasDigest.com, 2006, webpage:
 mardigrasdigest-Mobile.
 then New Year's Eve, followed by parades and balls in January and February, celebrating up to midnight before Ash Wednesday. In earlier times parades were held on New Year's Day. Other cities famous for Mardi Gras celebrations include Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Barranquilla, Colombia; Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago; Quebec City, Canada; Mazatlán, Sinaloa, Mexico; and New Orleans, Louisiana. 

Carnival is an important celebration in Anglican and Catholic European nations. In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the week before Ash Wednesday is called "shrovetide", ending on Shrove Tuesday. It has its popular celebratory aspects as well. Pancakes are a traditional food. Pancakes and related fried breads or pastries made with sugar, fat and eggs are also traditionally consumed at this time in many parts of Latin America and the Caribbean.

Mardi Gras in Dakar, Senegal
Mardi Gras in Marseille, France
Mardi Gras in Binche, Belgium

== Belgium ==
In the Belgian city of Binche the Mardi Gras festival is one of the most important days of the year and the summit of the Carnival of Binche. Around 1000 Gilles dance throughout the city from morning until past dusk, whilst traditional carnival songs play. In 2003, the "Carnival of Binche" was proclaimed one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO.

==Brazil==

Carnival is the most famous Brazilian holiday. During this time period Brazil attracts 70% of its tourists. Variations in carnival celebrations are observed throughout the multitude of Brazilian cities. Yet, a commonality observed among them is the incorporation of samba into the celebrations. The southeastern cities of Brazil have massive parades that take place in large sambadromes. The largest carnival celebration in Brazil and the world occurs in Rio de Janeiro, where two million people are found celebrating in the city. The city of Salvador also holds a large carnival celebration.

== Germany ==

The celebration of Mardi Gras in Germany is called Karneval, Fastnacht, or Fasching, depending on the region. [http://www.serve.com/shea/germusa/karneval.htm ] Fastnacht means "Eve of the Fast", but all three terms cover the whole carnival season with famous parades held in Cologne, Mainz, and Düsseldorf on the Monday before Ash Wednesday, called Rosenmontag (Rose Monday). The traditional start of Fasching is at 11:11 in the morning.

== Italy ==
In Italy Mardi Gras is called Martedí Grasso (Fat Tuesday). It's the main day of Carnival along with the Thursday before, called Giovedí Grasso (Fat Thursday), which ratifies the start of the celebrations. The most famous Carnivals in Italy are in Venice, Viareggio and Ivrea. Ivrea has the characteristic "Battle of Oranges" that finds its roots in medieval times. Italy is the birthplace of Carnival celebrations, having its origins in the ancient Roman festival of Saturnalia. The Italian version of the festival is spelled Carnevale. 

== Netherlands ==

The Netherlands also has a festival similar to Mardi Gras. It's called Carnaval and is similar to the Venice Carnival. The origin of the word Carnaval is 'Carne Vale' which means "Goodbye to the meat" in Latin. It marks the beginning of lent leading up to Easter.

The carnival in the Netherlands is mainly held in the southern part of the Netherlands in the provinces of Noord-Brabant and Limburg, some parts of Zeeland and in eastern parts of Twente and Gelderland. As with many popular festivals, people tend to loosen some moral codes and become laid-back or loose, which is based in the ancient role-reversal origins of Carnaval, including dressing in costumes.

== Sweden ==
In Sweden the celebration is called Fastan, when you eat fastlagsbulle, also called Fettisdagsbulle . That name comes from the words "fett" (fat) and "tisdag" (Tuesday). Originally, this was the only day one should eat faslagsbullar. 

== United States ==
Mardi Gras 2010 celebrants in the French Quarter of New Orleans, in the traditional colors of purple, green, gold, and especially white

While not observed nationally throughout the United States, a number of traditionally ethnic French cities and regions in the country have notable celebrations. Mardi Gras arrived in North America as a French Catholic tradition with the Le Moyne brothers, 
 "New Orleans & Mardi Gras History Timeline
" (event list),
 Mardi Gras Digest, 2005, webpage:
 MG-time.
 Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville and Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville, in the late 17th century, when King Louis XIV sent the pair to defend France's claim on the territory of Louisiane, which included what are now the U.S. states of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. 

The expedition, led by Iberville, entered the mouth of the Mississippi River on the evening of March 2, 1699, Lundi Gras. They did not yet know it was the river explored and claimed for France by René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle in 1683. The party proceeded upstream to a place on the east bank about 60 miles downriver from where New Orleans is today, and made camp. This was on March 3, 1699, Mardi Gras, so in honor of this holiday, Iberville named the spot Point du Mardi Gras (French: "Mardi Gras Point") and called the nearby tributary Bayou Mardi Gras. Bienville went on to found the settlement of Mobile, Alabama in 1702 as the first capital of French Louisiana. 
 "Timeline 18th Century:" (events),
 Timelines of History, 2007, webpage:
 TLine-1700-1724:
 on "1702-1711" of Mobile.
 In 1703 French settlers in Mobile established the first organized Mardi Gras celebration tradition in what was to become the United States. 
 "Mardi Gras in Mobile" (history),
 Jeff Sessions, Senator, Library of Congress, 2006, webpage:
 LibCongress-2665.
 
 "Mardi Gras" (history),
 Mobile Bay Convention & Visitors Bureau, 2007, webpage:
 MGmobile.
 The first informal mystic society, or krewe, was formed in Mobile in 1711, the Boeuf Gras Society. By 1720, Biloxi had been made capital of Louisiana. The French Mardi Gras customs had accompanied the colonists who settled there. 

Knights of Revelry parade down Royal Street in Mobile during the 2010 Mardi Gras season.
In 1723, the capital of Louisiana was moved to New Orleans, founded in 1718. Mobile's Cowbellion de Rakin Society was the first formally organized and masked mystic society in the United States to celebrate with a parade in 1830. The idea of mystic societies was exported to New Orleans in 1856 when six businessmen, three of whom were formerly of Mobile, gathered at a club room in New Orlean's French Quarter to organize a secret society, inspired by the Cowbellion de Rakin Society, that would observe Mardi Gras with a formal parade. They founded New Orleans' first and oldest krewe, the Mistick Krewe of Comus. Arthur B. LaCour, New Orleans Masquerade: Chronicles of Carnival (Pelican Publishing 1952) The tradition in New Orleans expanded to the point that it became synonymous with the city in popular perception, and embraced by residents of New Orleans beyond those of French or Catholic heritage. Mardi Gras celebrations are part of the basis of the slogan, Laissez les bons temps rouler, (Let the good times roll). Other cities along the Gulf Coast with early French colonial heritage, from Pensacola, Florida; Galveston, Texas; to Lafayette, Louisiana, have active Mardi Gras celebrations in balls. In the rural Acadiana area, many Cajuns celebrate with the Courir de Mardi Gras, a tradition that dates to medieval celebrations in France. 

== See also ==
* Carnaval de Ponce
* Joie de vivre
* Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras

== References ==

== External links ==

*Traditional Cajun Mardi Gras Celebrations
*Mardi Gras in Mobile, Encyclopedia of Alabama
*Prof. Carl Nivale's Compleat Carnival Compendium and Mardi Gras Manual
*Mardi Gras 2014 celebration photos
*Mardi Gras 2009 celebration photos
*Where to Celebrate Mardi Gras Around the World - slideshow by The Guardian
*Fashion plates featuring historic Mardi Gras costumes from the Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries

 


