[[Meteora]]

The Katholikon of Holy Trinity Monastery, Meteora.
The Metéora (, , lit. "middle of the sky", "suspended in the air" or "in the heavens above" — etymologically related to "Meteorite") is one of the largest and most important complexes of Eastern Orthodox monasteries in Greece, second only to Mount Athos. Sofianos, D.Z.: "Metéora". Holy Monastery of Great Meteoro, 1991. The six monasteries are built on natural sandstone rock pillars, at the northwestern edge of the Plain of Thessaly near the Pineios river and Pindus Mountains, in central Greece. The nearest town is Kalambaka. The Metéora is included on the UNESCO World Heritage List under criteria retrieved November 7, 2007 I, II, IV, V and VII. retrieved November 2, 2007 

==History==
The Theopetra caves 5 km south of Meteora had inhabitants fifty millennia ago. Y. Facorellis, N. Kyparissi-Apostolika and Y. Maniatis 2001 The cave of Theopetra, Kalambaka: radiocarbon evidence for 50,000 years of human presence. Radiocarbon 43 (2B): 1029-48 The oldest known example of a man-made structure was found within a prehistoric cave in central Greece, according to the Greek culture ministry. The structure is a stone wall that blocked two-thirds of the entrance to the Theopetra cave near Kalambaka on the north edge of the Thessalian plain. It was constructed 23,000 years ago, probably as a barrier to cold winds. “An optical dating test, known as Optically Stimulated Luminescence, was applied on quartz grains nested within the stones. We dated four different samples from the sediment and soil materials, and all provided identical dates,” Nikolaos Zacharias, director of the laboratory of archaeometry at the University of Peloponnese, told Discovery News.
According to a statement by the ministry of culture, “the dating matches the coldest period of the most recent ice age, indicating that the cavern’s inhabitants built the stone wall to protect themselves from the cold.” Excavated since 1987, the Theopetra cave is well known to palaeontologists as it was used and inhabited continuously from the Palaeolithic period onwards (50,000 to 5,000 years ago). [http://news.discovery.com/history/oldest-man-made-structure-found-in-greek-cave.html ] 

In the 9th century, an ascetic group of hermit monks moved up to the ancient pinnacles.

They were the first people to inhabit Metéora. They lived in hollows and fissures in the rock towers, some of which reach 1800 ft (550m) above the plain. This great height, combined with the sheerness of the cliff walls, kept away all but the most determined visitors. Initially the hermits led a life of solitude, meeting only on Sundays and special days to worship and pray in a chapel built at the foot of a rock known as Dhoupiani. As early as the 11th century AD hermit monks were believed to be living among the caves and cutouts in the rocks. 

The exact date of the establishment of the monasteries is unknown. By the late 11th and early 12th centuries, a rudimentary monastic state had formed called the Skete of Stagoi and was centered around the still-standing church of Theotokos (mother of God). By the end of the 12th century, an ascetic community had flocked to Metéora.

In 1344, Athanasios Koinovitis from Mount Athos brought a group of followers to Metéora. From 1356 to 1372, he founded the great Meteoron monastery on Broad Rock, which were perfect for the monks; they were safe from political upheaval and had complete control of the entry to the monastery. The only means of reaching it was by climbing a long ladder, which was drawn up whenever the monks felt threatened.

At the end of the 14th century, the Byzantine Empire's 800-year reign over northern Greece was being increasingly threatened by Turkish raiders who wanted control over the fertile plain of Thessaly. The hermit monks, seeking a retreat from the expanding Turkish occupation, found the inaccessible rock pillars of Meteora to be an ideal refuge. More than 20 monasteries were built, beginning in the 14th century. Six remain today. There is a common belief that Athanasios (founder of the first monastery) did not scale the rock, but was carried there by an eagle. retrieved March 20 

In 1517, Nectarios and Theophanes built the monastery of Varlaám, which was reputed to house the finger of St John and the shoulder blade of St Andrew.

Access to the monasteries was originally (and deliberately) difficult, requiring either long ladders lashed together or large nets used to haul up both goods and people. This required quite a leap of faith &ndash; the ropes were replaced, so the story goes, only "when the Lord let them break". retrieved November 9, 2007 In the words of UNESCO, "The net in which intrepid pilgrims were hoisted up vertically alongside the 373 m cliff where the Varlaam monastery dominates the valley symbolizes the fragility of a traditional way of life that is threatened with extinction." http://www.sacred-destinations.com/greece/meteora-monasteries.htm retrieved November 3, 2007 In the 1920s there was an improvement in the arrangements. Steps were cut into the rock, making the complex accessible via a bridge from the nearby plateau. During World War II the site was bombed. Many art treasures were stolen.

Until the 17th century, the primary means of conveying goods and people from these eyries was by means of baskets and ropes. retrieved September 11, 2007 

Six of the monasteries remain today. Of these six, four were inhabited by men, and two by women. Each monastery has fewer than 10 inhabitants. The monasteries are now tourist attractions.

==Geography==
Average elevation is 313 m. Meteora Map. Greeklandscapes.com. Retrieved on 2013-08-25. 

===Geology===

Studies suggest that the pinnacles were formed about 60 million years ago during the Paleogene Period. Meteora - Greece Weathering and earthquakes then shaped them into their present shape.

Beside the Pindos Mountains, at the western region of the Thessaly plain in the middle of northern Greece, these sandstone rocks rise from the ground. The rocks are composed of a mixture of sandstone and conglomerate. They were formed about 60 million years ago. A series of earth movements pushed the seabed upwards, creating a high plateau and causing many fault lines to appear in the thick layer of sandstone.
Cliffs of Meteora
Continuous weathering by water, wind and extremes of temperature turned them into huge rock pillars, marked by horizontal lines which geologists maintain were made by the waters of a prehistoric sea. Greek historian Herodotus wrote in the 5th century BC that local people believed the plain of Thessaly had once been a sea. If this was accurate, there was most probably an inundation at the end of the last Ice Age, around 8000 BC. However, he failed to mention the rocks of Metéora and they are not recorded in the writings of other ancient Greek authors. This has led to the belief that the pinnacles did not exist 2000 years ago; a theory dismissed by modern geologists.

The cave of Theopetra is located 4 km from Kalambaka. Its uniqueness from an archeological perspective is that in it contains, within a single site, the records of two greatly significant cultural transitions: The replacement of Neanderthals by modern humans, and the later transition from hunter-gathering to farming after the end of the last Ice Age. The cave consists of an immense 500 m2 rectangular chamber at the foot of a limestone hill, which rises to the northeast above the village of Theopetra, with an entrance 17 m wide by 3 m high. It lies at the foot of the Chasia mountain range, which forms the natural boundary between Thessaly and Macedonia prefectures, while the Lithaios River, a tributary of the Pineios River, flows in front of the cave. The small Lithaios River flowing literally on the doorsteps of the cave meant that cave dwellers had always easy access to fresh, clean water without the need to cover daily long distances to find it. Theopetra's Prehistoric Cave from Visit Meteora Travel. Retrieved 26, Jul 2013. Excavations and research and have discovered petrified diatoms, which have contributed to understanding the Palaeo-climate and climate changes. Radiocarbon dating evidences human presence dating back 50,000 years. The cave is open to the public.

==Climate==
The climate in the region varies greatly according to the time of year. It may be sweltering during summertime, but extremely cold in wintertime. Rainfall is generally heavy all year round, especially at higher altitudes, but the driest time of the year is during summer. 

==List of Monasteries==
All of these monasteries are located at Metéora in Greece, and most are perched on high cliffs and accessible by staircases cut into the rock formations. They were created to serve monks and nuns following the teachings of the Greek Orthodox Church. Much of the architecture of these buildings is Athonite Referring to Mount Athos in origin. Of the six intact monasteries, the Holy Monastery of St. Stephen and Monastery Roussanou are inhabited by nuns.

 Monastery Photograph 
 The Holy Monastery of Great Meteoron - This is the largest of the monasteries located at Metéora. It was erected in the mid-14th century and was the subject of restoration and embellishment projects in 1483 and 1552. The building serves as the main museum for tourists. The Katholikon (main church), consecrated in honour of the Transfiguration of Jesus was erected in the middle of 14th century and 1387/88 and decorated in 1483 and 1552. retrieved November 2, 2007 200px 
 The Holy Monastery of Varlaam – The Holy Monastery of Varlaam is the second largest monastery in the Metéora complex. It was built in 1541 and embellished in 1548. A church, dedicated to All Saints, is in the Athonite type (cross-in-square with dome and choirs), with spacious exonarthex (lite) is surrounded by a dome. It was built in 1541/42 and decorated in 1548, while the exonarthex was decorated in 1566. The old refectory is used as a museum while north of the church is the parekklesion of the Three Bishops, built in 1627 and decorated in 1637. retrieved May 22, 2009 200px 
 The Holy Monastery of Rousanou/St. Barbara Meteora - Greece was founded in the middle of 16th century and decorated in 1560. 200px 
 The Holy Monastery of St. Nicholas Anapausas, built in the 16th century, is a small church. It was decorated by the Cretan painter Theophanis Strelitzas, in 1527. 200px 
 The Holy Monastery of St. Stephen is a small church built in the 16th century and decorated in 1545. This monastery rests on the plain rather than on a cliff. It was damaged by the Nazis during World War II who believed it was harboring insurgents and was abandoned. Nuns took it over and reconstructed it. retrieved September 11, 2007 200px 
 The Monastery of the Holy Trinity is on top of the cliffs. It was built in 1475 and was remodeled many times in 1684, 1689, 1692, 1741. 200px 

==Literature, music and film inspired by Meteora==
* The monastery of Holy Trinity was a filming location in the 1981 James Bond movie For Your Eyes Only Internet Movie DataBase 
*Scenes from Tintin and the Golden Fleece were also shot at the Meteora monasteries.
* The rock area was a primary inspiration behind the Linkin Park album of the same name.
* Michina, the main setting of the movie is based on Meteora.
* Meteora is the main location in the fiction book The Spook's Sacrifice, by Lancashire author Joseph Delaney
* The Holy Monastery of St. Nicholas Anapausas was an inspiration for St. Francis Folly in the computer game Tomb Raider and .
* One of the surviving characters in "Max Brooks"'s zombie apocalypse novel, "World War Z" finds refuge and peace of mind in the monasteries during and after the zombie war.
* The 2012 movie Metéora directed by Spiros Stathoulopoulos is set in the monasteries and scenery of Meteora
* Primary location and name of Volume 3 in the comic book series "Le Décalogue" by French author Frank Giroud.
* The Eyrie of Vale of the House of Arryn from Game of Thrones is based on Meteora

==Gallery==

Image:Meteora 2 evlahos.jpg|The Varlaam monastery on its rock pedestal.
Image:Meteora Agios Stefanos.jpg|The monastery Agiou Stephanou (Saint Stephen's) is inhabited by nuns only.
Image:Greece meteora monasteries.JPG|The Rousanou, the Nikolaos and the Grand Meteora monasteries.
Image:Meteora 1 evlahos.jpg| The Rousanou monastery.
Image:Megalo Meteoro panorama.jpg| The Grand Meteoro monastery.
Image:Agios Nikolaos Anapafsa.jpg| The Holy Monastery of St. Nicholas Anapausas
Image:Meteory 1 wisnia6522.jpg| Panorama of the Meteora valley
Image:Meteora Valley Meteora Greece.jpg|Panoramic view at Meteora valley
Image:Meteora valley, Meteora, Greece.jpg|Panoramic view at Meteora valley
Image:Monastery Varlaam, Meteora, Greece.jpg|Panoramic view at monastery Varlaam
Image:Roussanou, Meteora, Greece.jpg|Panoramic view at monastery Roussanou
Image:Varlaam and Grand Metereon, Meteora, Greece.jpg|Panoramic view at monasteries Varlaam and Grand Metereon
Image:Varlaam, Meteora, Greece.jpg|Panoramic view at monastery Varlaam

==Notes==

==External references==
* Reader's Digest. Strange Worlds Amazing Places (1994), 432 pp. Published: Reader's Digest Association Limited, London. ISBN 0-276-42111-6

==External links==

*Suspended in the air | Meteora timelapse video of Meteora

 


