[[Mombasa]]

Mombasa is the second-largest The World Factbook. Cia.gov. Retrieved on 2013-08-17. city in Kenya, with a population of about 1.2 million. Business Daily. Investors fault Mombasa’s new master plan Retrieved on 19th August 2014. 

A regional cultural and economic hub, Mombasa has a large port and an international airport, and is an important regional tourism centre. Located on the east coast of Kenya, in Mombasa County and the former Coast Province, Mombasa's bordering the Indian Ocean made it a historical trading centre, History of Mombasa | Mombasa, Kenya. Mombasainfo.com. Retrieved on 2013-08-17. and it has been controlled by many countries because of its strategic location.

Administratively, Mombasa is the capital of, and is coincident with, Mombasa County. The governor is Hassan Ali Joho.

== Description ==
The city had a population of 939,370 Kenya Census 2009 (Page 7). Total Population by county Retrieved on 19th August 2014. per the 2009 census and is located on Mombasa Island and sprawls to the surrounding mainlands. The island is separated from the mainland by two creeks: Tudor Creek and Kilindini Harbour. It is connected to the mainland to the north by the Nyali Bridge, to the south by the Likoni Ferry, and to the west by the Makupa Causeway, alongside which runs the Kenya-Uganda Railway. The port serves both Kenya and countries of the interior, linking them to the ocean. The city is served by Moi International Airport located in the northwest mainland suburb of Chaani.

Mombasa has a cosmopolitan population, with the Swahili people and Mijikenda predominant. Other communities include the Akamba and Taita Bantus. The major religions practiced in the city are Islam, Christianity and Hinduism. Kenya 2009 Census Over the centuries, many immigrants and traders have settled in Mombasa, particularly from Iran, the Middle East, Somalia, and the Indian sub-continent, who came mainly as traders and skilled craftsmen. There are also a number of tourists.

== History ==

Kenya–Uganda railway near Mombasa, circa 1899

The founding of Mombasa is associated with two rulers: Mwana Mkisi (female) and Shehe Mvita. According to oral history and medieval commentaries, Shehe Mvita superseded the dynasty of Mwana Mkisi and established his own town on Mombasa Island. Shehe Mvita is remembered as a Muslim of great learning and so is connected more directly with the present ideals of Swahili culture that people identify with Mombasa. The ancient history associated with Shehe Mvita and the founding of an urban settlement on Mombasa Island is still linked to present-day peoples living in Mombasa. The Thenashara Taifa (or Twelve Nations) Swahili lineages recount this ancient history today and are the keepers of local Swahili traditions. Even though today Mombasa is a very heterogeneous cultural mix, families associated with the Twelve Nations are still considered the original inhabitants of the city.

Most of the early information on Mombasa comes from Portuguese chroniclers writing in the 16th century. The famous Moroccan scholar and traveller Ibn Battuta did visit Mombasa in 1331 on his travels on the eastern coast of Africa and made some mention of the city, although he only stayed one night. He noted that the people of Mombasa were Shãfi'i Muslims, "a religious people, trustworthy and righteous. Their mosques are made of wood, expertly built."

The exact founding date of the city is unknown, but it has a long history. Kenyan school history books place the founding of Mombasa as 900 A.D. It must have been already a prosperous trading town in the 12th century, as the Arab geographer Al Idrisi mentions it in 1151.

1572 Mombasa from Civitates orbis terrarum by Georg Braun and Franz Hogenberg
During the pre-modern period, Mombasa was an important centre for the trade in spices, gold, and ivory. Its trade links reached as far as India and China and oral historians today can still recall this period of local history. India history shows that there was trade links between Mombasa and Cholas of South India. Throughout the early modern period, Mombasa was a key node in the complex and far reaching Indian Ocean trading networks, its key exports then were ivory, millet, sesamum and coconuts.

In the late pre-colonial period (late 19th century), it was the metropolis of a plantation society, which became dependent on slave labour (sources contradict whether the city was ever an important place for exporting slaves) but ivory caravans remained a major source of economic prosperity. Mombasa became the major port city of pre-colonial Kenya in the Middle Ages and was used to trade with other African port cities, Persia, Arab traders, Yemen India and China. Hybrid Urbanism By Nezar Al-Sayyad 15th-century Portuguese voyager Duarte Barbosa claimed, " is a place of great traffic and has a good harbour in which there are always moored small craft of many kinds and also great ships, both of which are bound from Sofala and others which come from Cambay and Melinde and others which sail to the island of Zanzibar." The African Dispersal in the Deccan By Shanti Sadiq Ali 

Vasco da Gama was the first known European to visit Mombasa, receiving a chilly reception in 1498. Two years later, the town was sacked by the Portuguese. In 1502, the sultanate became independent from Kilwa Kisiwani and was renamed as Mvita (in Swahili) or Manbasa (Arabic). Portugal attacked the city again in 1528. In 1585 Turks led by Emir 'Ali Bey caused revolts from Mogadishu to Mombasa against the Portuguese landlords; only Malindi remained loyal to Portugal. Zimba cannibals overcame the towns of Sena and Tete on the Zambezi, and in 1587 they took Kilwa, killing 3,000 people. At Mombasa the Zimba slaughtered the Muslim inhabitants; but they were halted at Malindi by the Bantu-speaking Segeju and went home. This stimulated the Portuguese to take over Mombasa a third time in 1589, and four years later they built Fort Jesus to administer the region. Between Lake Malawi and the Zambezi mouth, Kalonga Mzura made an alliance with the Portuguese in 1608 and fielded 4,000 warriors to help defeat their rival Zimba, who were led by chief Lundi.

With the capture of Fort Jesus in 1698, the town came under the influence of the Sultanate of Oman, subordinate to the Omani rulers on the island of Unguja, prompting regular local rebellions. Oman appointed three consecutive Governors (Wali in Arabic, Liwali in Swahili):
*12 December 1698–December 1698: Imam Sa'if ibn Sultan
*December 1698 – 1728: Nasr ibn Abdallah al-Mazru'i
*1728–12 March 1728: Shaykh Rumba

Next, Mombasa returned to Portuguese rule by captain-major Álvaro Caetano de Melo Castro (12 March 1728 – 21 September 1729), then four new Omani Liwali until 1746, when the last of them made it independent again (disputed by Oman), as the first of its recorded Sultans:
*1746–1755: 'Ali ibn Uthman al-Mazru'i
*1755–1773: Masud ibn Nasr al-Mazru'i
*1773–1782: Abdallah ibn Muhammad al-Mazru'i
*1782–1811: Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Mazru'i (born 17–died 1814)
*1812–1823: 'Abdallah ibn Ahmad al-Mazru'i (died 1823)
*1823–1826: Sulayman ibn 'Ali al-Mazru'i

From 9 February 1824 to 25 July 1826, there was a British protectorate over Mombasa, represented by Governors. Omani rule was restored in 1826; seven liwalis where appointed. On 24 June 1837, it was nominally annexed by Said bin Sultan of Muscat and Oman. On 25 May 1887, its administration was relinquished to the British East Africa Association, later the Imperial British East Africa Company. It soon became the capital of the British East Africa Protectorate and the sea terminal of the Uganda Railway, which was started in 1896. Many workers were brought in from British India to build the railway, and the city's fortunes revived. The Sultan of Zanzibar formally presented the town to the British in 1898.

Mombasa became the capital of the Protectorate of Kenya, sometime between 1887 and around 1907 then Kenya's capital was moved to Nairobi at around 1906. Nairobi has since been Kenya's capital to date. 
Old Town

On 28 November 2002, a suicide car bomb exploded at the Israeli-owned beachfront Paradise Hotel, killing three Israelis and ten Kenyans. About 20 minutes earlier, an unsuccessful attempt was made to shoot down an Arkia Israel Airlines Boeing 757 chartered tourist plane taking off from nearby Moi International Airport using surface-to-air missiles; nobody was hurt on the plane, which landed safely in Tel Aviv. The main suspect for both attacks is al Qaeda (see Kenyan hotel bombing).

== Geography and climate ==

Being a coastal town, Mombasa is characterized by a flat topography. The town of Mombasa is centred on Mombasa Island, but extends to the mainland. The island is separated from the mainland by two creeks, Port Reitz in the south and Tudor Creek in the north.

Mombasa has a tropical wet and dry climate (Köppen: Aw). The amount of rainfall depends essentially on season. The rainiest months are April and May, while in January to February the rainfall is minimal.

== Economy ==
Biashara Street, Mombasa.
Mombasa is a major trade centre and home to Kenya's only large seaport, the Kilindini Harbour. KPA. KPA. Retrieved on 2013-08-17. Kilindini is an old Swahili term meaning "deep". The port is so-called because the channel is naturally very deep. Kilindini Harbor is an example of a natural geographic phenomenon called a ria, formed at the end of the last glacial period when the sea level rose and engulfed a river that was flowing from the mainland.

Mombasa is a centre of coastal tourism in Kenya. Mombasa Island itself is not a main attraction, although many people visit the Old Town and Fort Jesus. The Nyali, Bamburi, and Shanzu beaches are located north of the city. The Shelly, Tiwi, and Diani beaches are located south of Mombasa. Several luxury hotels exist on these beaches, while the less expensive hotels are located further away.

Mombasa's northern shoreline is renowned for its vibrant 24-hour entertainment offers, including both family entertainment (water parks, cinemas, bowling, etc.), sports (watersports, mountain biking and gokarting), culinary offers (restaurants offering a wide range of specialties from Kenya, China, Japan, India, Italy, Germany and other countries) and nightlife (bars, pubs, clubs, discothèques, etc.).

Other local industries include an oil refinery with a capacity of 80,000 barrels a day, Mombasa Refinery - A Barrel Full. Abarrelfull.wikidot.com (2012-12-08). Retrieved on 2013-08-17. and a cement factory capable of producing over 1.1 Million tons per year. http://mombasacement.com/ The major intercontinental undersea telecom cables reach shore next to Mombasa, connecting East Africa to the rest of the world and supporting a fast-growing call centre business in the area.

== Transport ==

=== Air ===
Sunrise at Moi International Airport
Moi International Airport serves the city of Mombasa. It is located in Port Reitz area, also known locally as Chaani area on the mainland metropolitan area. Flights to Nairobi and other Kenyan, European and Middle Eastern destinations depart from the airport. Besides Mombasa and Nairobi is well connected by chartered flights operated via Wilson airport.
Moi International Airport

=== Train ===
Mombasa has a railway station and Kenya Railways runs overnight passenger trains from Mombasa to Nairobi, though the service is less extensive than it used to be.

=== Road ===
Driving in Mombasa is straightforward and the majority of the roads are tarmacked. Main roads include; Jomo Kenyatta Avenue, Digo Road, Nyerere Road, Nkurumah Road, Moi Avenue, Mama Ngina Drive, Barack Obama Road, Nairobi Highway and Nyali Road

Highways connect Mombasa to Nairobi, Dar es Salaam while northward road link to Malindi and Lamu, which also extends towards the border with Somalia.

Moi Avenue in Mombasa

==== Matatu ====
Within Mombasa, most local people use Matatus (mini-buses) which are extremely common in Kenya, to move around the city and its suburbs.

==== Tuk-Tuk ====
A Tuk-Tuk is an auto rickshaw a motor vehicle with three wheels widely used as transport around the city and its suburbs. No more than three passenger may be carried.

==== Boda-boda ====
A boda-boda is originally a bicycle taxi. Especially in cities, the bicycles are more and more replaced by motorbikes.

=== Sea ===
Mombasa Waterfront with ferry
Mombasa's port is the largest in Kenya, with 19 deep water berths with two additional berths nearing completion and two oil terminals. Home. Kpa.co.ke. Retrieved on 2013-08-17. Rail connects the port to the interior. There is little or no scheduled passenger service. International cruise ships frequent the port.

==== Ferry ====
There is no bridge between Mombasa Island and south coast, instead the distance is served by ferries operated by the Kenya Ferry Service from Kilindini and Mtongwe to Likoni in the south coast of Mombasa. In 1994, a ferry serving Mtongwe route sank, 270+ people perished. Francis Thoya, "The restless ghosts of Mtongwe", Wednesday magazine, November 19, 2003. 

As a result of the major build-up of more luxurious hotels in South Coast and a lack of a direct bridge linking the South Coast to the North Coast, visiting tourists have the option of flying directly into the South Coast airstrip using the domestic airline, Air Kenya. Flying into South Coast, Mombasa 

== Culture ==
Moonlit boats in Mombasa
A major cultural hub in Kenya and East Africa, Mombasa's proximity to South Asia, Zanzibar, and Nairobi as well as its large shipping and maritime industries gives it a diverse mosaic of cultures. Music is a main feature of Mombasa's culture. The majority of Mombasa's population is Muslim. Oded, Arye (2000). Islam and Politics in Kenya. Lynne Rienner Publishers, p. 11 

=== Music and nightlife ===
Taarab music, which originates from Zanzibar, has a prominent local presence. Taraab Music : National Geographic World Music. Worldmusic.nationalgeographic.com (2002-10-17). Retrieved on 2013-08-17. Styles of music native to Mombasa include the smooth and mellow Bango, fast-paced Chakacha and traditional Mwanzele. Benga and Ohangla are also very popular.

Musicians of note are Mombasa Roots, Safari Sounds, Them Mushrooms, Anwar Juma Bhalo and Princess Farida.
Mombasa was also the home or base for former greats like Fundi Konde, renowned for his song "Tausi"; Fadhili Williams and Grand Charo, famous for the song "Malaika"; Sal Davies; Malika Mohammed of Vidonge hit song; Stara Butte; Juma Bhalo.
Contemporary hiphop fusion artistes are Susumila, Majizee, Nyota Ndogo, Cannibal (musician), Sharama and Ukoo Flani supergroup which once could boast up to 40 rappers.

Recently, hip hop, reggae, soul, blues, salsa and (among the Indian community) bhangra have become popular, especially amongst the youth. Mombasa is mainly a tourism centre populated by hundreds of entertainment spots of all categories from night clubs, bars, hotels, fancy restaurants and many more. It has the most vibrant night life in Kenya catering for the mainly tourist population.

=== Sports ===
Currently, Mombasa is represented in the Kenyan Premier League by Bandari F.C, which plays at the Mbaraki Sports Grounds. Also, the Congo United FC, Promoted and dropped in 2011, are in the second tier Nationwide Super League with 4 other hometown clubs - Admiral F.C.; Magongo Rangers; Sparki Youth & Coast United. 
Derbies between Mombasa teams have become intriguing affairs recently. 
Another team, Coast Stars, was relegated several years ago from the league. The only Mombasa-based team to win the league is Feisal F.C., the 1965 champions. Kiziwi leopards was a popular team in the 1980s as was Mombasa Wanderers decades before.
There are several cricket teams in Mombasa. One of them is Mombasa Sports Club (MSC), whose ground was given ODI status in 2006. MSC has also a rugby union team playing in the Kenya Cup League, the premier rugby competition in Kenya. Mvita XI men and MSC ladies represent Mombasa in Kenyan field hockey leagues.

The 2007 World Cross Country Championships were held in Mombasa. Mombasa Marathon is competed annually in Mombasa. The town also hosts the biennial classic edition of Safari Rally and annually a Kenya National Rally Championship round.

Scuba diving takes place mostly within the Mombasa Marine National Park and Reserve, which is managed and maintained by Kenya Wildlife Service. The park has a length of about 8 km.

== Suburbs ==

=== Mombasa Island ===
Tudor
Kizingo: Considered the prime residential area of Mombasa. The State House Mombasa, Provincial Headquarters, The Mombasa Law Courts, The Municipal Council are located in Kizingo. The Aga Khan Academy, Aga Khan High School, Serani Primary School, Serani High School, Santokben Nursery School, Coast Academy, Jaffery Academy, Mombasa Primary School, Loreto Convent, Mama Ngina Girls' High School and the Government Training Institute (GTI) Mombasa are all part of Kizingo.

Kibokoni: Part of Old Town with Swahili architecture. Fort Jesus is in Baghani.

Englani:Part of Old town between Kibokoni and Makadara

Kuze: Part of Old Town with Swahili culture and architecture. Originally flourishing with Swahili people but currently becoming a more cosmopolitan neighbourhood.

Makadara: Part of Old Town consisting of a high number of descendants of Baluchi former soldiers who settled within this area before it developed into a town. The name is derived from the Arabic word Qadr-ur-Rahman meaning fate of God.

Ganjoni: Primarily a middle class residential, home of second biggest dry dock of Africa after the one in South Africa.

Tudor: Another middle class residential area with homes and shops. The Mombasa Polytechnic University College (MPUC) is situated in this neighborhood

=== North Coast ===
Seafront of Nyali Beach, north coast (from the Voyager Resort).
Nyali: Also considered a prime and up-market residential area, it is on the mainland north of the island and is linked by the New Nyali Bridge. It has numerous beach front hotels in the area known as the "North Coast". Nyali has two distinct sections - the posh Old Nyali and the upcoming New Nyali. For many residents, Nyali has now become a self-contained residential area, with two Nakumatts, a multiplex cinema, shopping malls, banks, schools and post offices. This often eliminates the need for residents to cross the bridge and to go into the congested Mombasa city centre. Nyali is home for the Nyali Cinemax complex, Mamba Village, the Nyali Golf Club, and some of the most prestigious academic institutions of the Coast Province.

Kongowea: Kongowea Location is a densely populated area with 15 villages, two sub-locations and an estimated population of 106,180 residents. 2009 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics Kongowea is a cosmopolitan settlement mainly inhabited by people from mainland who migrated into the city in search of employment, mainly in service and manufacturing sector. The area is adjacent to the rich suburb of Nyali which employs a portion of the village residents. They are mainly hired as cheap labour as watchmen, gardeners, masons for up coming houses and house help. The most well known villages inside Kongowea include Kisumu Ndogo, Shauri Yako and Mnazi Mmoja, despite being located in this prime area, many residents live under extreme conditions – poor sanitation, high crime rate and lack of basic essential amenities like schools, hospitals and tap water. Kongowea is also home to one of the largest open-air markets in Eastern Africa.

Bamburi: also an outlying township (fifteen minutes drive) along the Malindi road. Bamburi is the location of Bamburi Portland Cement Company. Other notable features in the area are the Mijikenda public beach, commonly known as Pirates, and Haller Park, a nature trail and wildlife conservatory. Kiembeni Estate, also in the Bamburi area, hosts around 100,000 residents. The estate has its own supermarket, several retail shops, salons and boutiques, and a number of licensed drinking dens. The establishments include The Shilla Bar, Turkey Base, Stars Garden and Sensera pub. Kiembeni is arguably the largest estate in Mombasa, and growing even faster.

Other areas include, Shanzu, Mkomani, Bombolulu, Kisauni and, across the Mtwapa creek, the popular area of Mtwapa, which is already located in Kilifi county.

The North Coast is famous for its broad entertainment industry which attracts locals and tourists as well.

=== South Coast ===
Likoni: is a lower income and lower-middle-class neighborhood connected to Mombasa Island by ferry. It is south of Mombasa Island and made up of mostly non-Swahili Bantu tribes. The ferry was the target of the Likoni Riots of 1997. http://www.hrw.org/reports/2002/kenya/Kenya0502-06.htm 

Diani Beach: a beach resort area situated over the Likoni Ferry on the south coast of Mombasa. It is located some 36 km (22 mi) south of Mombasa city on the mainland coast and is a prime resort for many local and international tourists. Diani Beach has an airport at Ukunda town to cater for tourists who fly there directly from Nairobi Wilson or any other airports and airfields in the country.

=== Mombasa Mainland ===
Magongo: is an outlying township 20 minutes driving distance northwest of Mombasa Island, situated on the Nairobi Highway. This fringe community lacks any effective electricity, water or sewer systems, with a general lack of infrastructure. Poverty, lack of sanitation, and unemployment continue to be the greatest issues for the Mikindani Township, which have ensured low health and safety standards for its residents. Poor, lower class housing is widespread, ranging from simple stone, two storey structures to mud and earth homes fitted with corrugated iron roofs. Much of the community works outside of the township, within Mombasa Island itself as there is a lack of employment and industry. There are number of small health clinics, shops, and a few public primary schools: Nazarene primary is one school, which is known in particular as being staffed by a revolving volunteer teacher base from Western, and predominately English speaking nations. This small town serves as a link between the city and Moi International Airport. Magongo is also home to the Akamba Handicraft Cooperative.

Mikindani, a suburban area: This is an outlying township on the mainland along the Nairobi Highway.It is built in the heavy industrial sections of Changamwe and mainly accommodate the working class who either work in the industries, the town centre on the Island and the Port at Kilindini harbor.

Miritini: outlying township on the Mombasa Nairobi Highway which is first growing as a suburban area.

Changamwe: Industrial area which contains the Kipevu power generation projects, the Kenya Oil Refinery Company facility and housing estates such as Chaani and is the gateway to the Moi International Airport. The area has administrative offices of the D.O and the chiefs who serve the administrative division.

Migadini & Chaani: They are two adjacent estate that are located east of Airport road and east of Kenya Port Authority. They are bordered by Port Reitz, Magongo and KPA

Port Reitz: Is a suburb on the mainland which contains a beach, oil refineries, housing estates etc. Moi International Airport and the Port Reitz District Hospital are in Port Reitz.

==Political divisions==
Mombasa is also a county and divided into six constituencies and thirty wards. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics; and the final report of the IEBC as ratified in the National Assembly Constituencies and County Assembly Wards Order, 2012. 

 Constituency Wards 
 Changamwe Port Reitz Kipevu Airport Miritini Chaani 
 Jomvu Jomvu Kuu Magongo Mikindani 
 Kisauni MjambereJundaBamburiMwakirungeMtopangaMagogoniShanzu 
 Nyali Frere TownZiwa La Ng'ombeMkomaniKongoweaKadzandani 
 Likoni MtongweShika AdabuBofuLikoniTimbwani 
 Mvita Mji wa Kale/ MakadaraTudorTononokaShimanzi/ GanjoniMajengo 

== In popular culture ==
*Mombasa is noted in the 2010 film Inception as the place where a foot chase sequence occurs and where two members of the Inception team are recruited. The city of Tangier, Morocco serves as a stand-in for Mombasa.
*Finnish pop hit Mombasa by Taiska is about Mombasa.
*Mentioned in the Warren Zevon song Roland The Headless Thompson Gunner
*Mombasa expands into a mega city known as New Mombasa in the Halo universe and is home to the massive Forerunner artifact that is buried beneath the city and extends into the Indian Ocean. It is also the main setting for .
*Following Barack Obama's successful Presidential campaign in 2008, Mombasa and Honolulu became sister cities.
*In the U.S., the Walt Disney World resort recreated an Kenyan village named "Harambe" modeled after Mombasa in the Africa section of the Disney's Animal Kingdom theme park. The park features a store called the "Mombasa Marketplace". http://www.mouseplanet.com/guide/971/Walt-Disney-World/Disneys-Animal-Kingdom/Africa/Mombasa-Marketplace 

== Sister cities ==
* Mombasa is a sister city of: Twinning of Cities. Mombasacity.go.ke. Retrieved on 2013-08-17. 

 Country City County/District/Province/Region/State Date 
 USA Seattle Washington 6 April 1981 http://www.seattlemombasa.org/ 
 USA Long Beach California 20 November 2007 
 USA Charlotte Amalie United States Virgin Islands unknown 
 USA Honolulu Hawaii 2008 
 South Africa eThekwini KwaZulu-Natal 20 February 2012 
 Norway Bergen Hordaland unknown 
 China Lianyungang Jiangsu unknown 
 China Fuzhou Fujian unknown 

==Notable residents==
During its history, Mombasa was visited by numerous pioneers of the maritime exploration, like the Arabs Al Idrissi (1151) and Ibn Battuta (1330), the Chinese Zheng He (1413) or the Portuguese Vasco da Gama (1498), Pedro Álvares Cabral (1500) João da Nova (1505) and Afonso de Albuquerque (1507).

* Karen Blixen (Danish: ˈb̥leɡ̊sn̩; 17 April 1885 – 7 September 1962)

* Thomas Risley Odhiambo (1931 Mombasa Thomas R. Odhiambo, The World Food Prize - 2003 Nairobi)

* Fadhili William (1938 Mombasa - 2001 Nairobi), musician, singer, composer. He introduced the use of the electric guitar and the twist in east Africa. He is also the composer of the song Malaika. "Mombasa's Malaika", We Said Go Travel, 21 February 2013 

* Abdilatif Abdalla (1946 Mombasa), writer, university professor and political protestor. "Prison Literature in Kenya: Q & A with Abdilatif Abdalla", kimaniwawanjiru, 6 October 2010 

* Ayub Ogada (1952 Mombasa), musician, singer and composer known for having composed two songs of the movie The Constant Gardener. Ayub Ogada, IMusic 

* Timothy R. McClanahan (1957 Wallingford, Connecticut), marine ecologist who lives and works in Mombasa since 1991. Marine Fellow: Tim R. McClanahan, Ph.D., Environmental Initiatives, The Pew Charitable Trusts 

==Image gallery==

File:Mombasa Building.jpg| Mombasa CBD Building
File:Mombasa beach sunrise.jpg| Mombasa beach sunrise
File:Tudor water sports slipway.jpg|Tudor water sports slipway
File:Port of Mombasa.jpg|Port of Mombasa

== See also ==

* Ngomongo Villages
* Haller Park

== References ==

== External links ==

* Mombasa County Government
* WorldStatesmen - Kenya

 


