[[Nairobi]]

Nairobi is the capital and largest city of Kenya. The city and its surrounding area also form the Nairobi County. The name "Nairobi" comes from the Maasai phrase Enkare Nyrobi, which translates to "cold water". The phrase is also the Maasai name of the Nairobi river, which in turn lent its name to the city. However, it is popularly known as the "Green City in the Sun" and is surrounded by several expanding villa suburbs. Inhabitants of Nairobi are called Nairobians, and the city is governed by the County Government of Nairobi, whose current governor is Evans Kidero.

Founded by the British in 1899 as a simple rail depot on the railway linking Mombasa to Uganda, Roger S. Greenway, Timothy M. Monsma, Cities: missions' new frontier, (Baker Book House: 1989), p.163. the town quickly grew to become the capital of British East Africa in 1907, and eventually the capital of the newly independent Kenyan republic in 1963. During Kenya's colonial period, the city became a centre for the colony's coffee, tea and sisal industry. Nairobi city is also a county in itself. The city lies on the Nairobi River, in the south of the country and has an elevation of 1795 m above sea-level. 

Nairobi is the most populous city in eastern Africa, with a current estimated population of about 3 million. According to the 2009 Census, in the administrative area of Nairobi, 3,138,295 inhabitants lived within 696 km2. Nairobi is currently the 14th largest city in Africa, including the population of its suburbs.

Nairobi is now one of the most prominent cities in Africa, both politically and financially. Bauck.com "City Guide to Nairobi - The Green City in the Sun". Retrieved 2007-06-17 Home to thousands of Kenyan businesses and over 100 major international companies and organisations, including the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the main coordinating and headquarters for the UN in Africa and Middle East, the United Nations Office in Nairobi (UNON), Nairobi is an established hub for business and culture. The Nairobi Stock Exchange (NSE) is one of the largest in Africa and the second oldest exchange on the continent. It is Africa's fourth largest exchange in terms of trading volume, capable of making 10 million trades a day. [http://www.millenniumit.com/esp/news_7.php ] The Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network (GaWC) defines Nairobi as a prominent social centre.

==History==

Nairobi at sunset
The area was essentially uninhabited swamp until a supply depot of the Uganda Railway was built in 1899, which soon became the railway's headquarters. The city was named after a water hole known in Maasai as Enkare Nairobi, meaning "place of cool waters". It was completely rebuilt in the early 1900s after an outbreak of plague and the burning of the original town. The location of the Nairobi railway camp was chosen due to its central position between Mombasa and Kampala. It was also chosen because its network of rivers could supply the camp with water and its elevation would make it cool enough for residential purposes. However, malaria was a serious problem, leading to at least one attempt to have the town moved. 

In 1905, Nairobi replaced Mombasa as capital of the British protectorate, and the city grew around administration and tourism, initially in the form of big game hunting. As the British occupiers started to explore the region, they started using Nairobi as their first port of call. This prompted the colonial government to build several spectacular grand hotels in the city. The main occupants were British game hunters.

Nairobi continued to grow under the British and many Britons settled within the city's suburbs. In 1919, Nairobi was declared to be a municipality. 
 
In February 1926, E.A.T. Dutton passed through Nairobi on his way to Mount Kenya, and said of the city:

The continuous expansion of the city began to anger the Maasai, as the city was devouring their land to the south. It also angered the Kikuyu people, who wanted the land returned to them. After the end of World War II, this friction developed into the Mau Mau rebellion. Jomo Kenyatta, Kenya's future president, was jailed for his involvement even though there was no evidence linking him to the rebellion. Pressure exerted from the locals onto the British resulted in Kenyan independence in 1963, with Nairobi as the capital of the new republic.

After independence, Nairobi grew rapidly and this growth put pressure on the city's infrastructure. Power cuts and water shortages were a common occurrence, though in the past few years better city planning has helped to put some of these problems in check.

Nairobi showing Fedha Towers, IECA Building, the Nairobi Safari Club and Anniversary Towers

The United States Embassy, then located in downtown Nairobi, was bombed in August 1998 by Al-Qaida, as one of a series of US embassy bombings. It is now the site of a memorial park. 

==Geography==
An aerial view of Nairobi, the central business district and Ngong Road
Kenyatta International Conference Centre
Satellite View of Nairobi

The city is situated at and occupies 696 km2.

Nairobi is situated between the cities of Kampala and Mombasa. As Nairobi is adjacent to the eastern edge of the Rift Valley, minor earthquakes and tremors occasionally occur. The Ngong Hills, located to the west of the city, are the most prominent geographical feature of the Nairobi area. Mount Kenya is situated north of Nairobi, and Mount Kilimanjaro is towards the south-east. Both mountains are visible from Nairobi on a clear day. 

The Nairobi River and its tributaries traverse through the Nairobi County. Nobel Peace Prize laureate Wangari Maathai has fought fiercely to save the indigenous Karura Forest in northern Nairobi which was under threat of being replaced by housing and other infrastructure. 

Nairobi's western suburbs stretch all the way from the Kenyatta National Hospital in the south to the UN headquarters at Gigiri suburb in the north, a distance of about 20 km.
The city is centred on the City Square, which is located in the Central Business District. The Kenyan Parliament buildings, the Holy Family Cathedral, Nairobi City Hall, Nairobi Law Courts, and the Kenyatta Conference Centre all surround the square.

===Climate===
Under the Köppen climate classification, Nairobi has a subtropical highland climate (Cfb). At 1795 m above sea level, evenings may be cool, especially in the June/July season, when the temperature can drop to 10 C. The sunniest and warmest part of the year is from December to March, when temperatures average the mid-twenties during the day. The mean maximum temperature for this period is 24 C. 

There are two rainy seasons, but rainfall can be moderate. The cloudiest part of the year is just after the first rainy season, when, until September, conditions are usually overcast with drizzle. As Nairobi is situated close to the equator, the differences between the seasons are minimal. The seasons are referred to as the wet season and dry season. The timing of sunrise and sunset varies little throughout the year for the same reason. 

===Districts and neighbourhoods===
Nairobi is divided into a series of constituencies, these are Makadara, Kamukunji, Starehe, Langata, Dagoretti, Westlands, Kasarani, and Embakasi. The main administrative divisions of Nairobi are Central, Dagoretti, Embakasi, Kasarani, Kibera, Makadara, Pumwani, and Westlands. Most of the upmarket suburbs are situated to the west and north-central of Nairobi, where most European settlers resided during the colonial times. These include Karen, Langata, Lavington, Gigiri, Muthaiga, Brookside, Spring Valley, Loresho, Kilimani, Kileleshwa, Hurlingham, Runda, Kitisuru, Nyari, Kyuna, Lower Kabete, Westlands, and Highridge, although Kangemi, Kawangware, and Dagoretti are lower income areas close to these affluent suburbs. The city's colonial past is commemorated by many English place-names. Most lower-middle and upper middle income neighbourhoods are located in the north-central areas such as Highridge, Parklands, Ngara, Pangani, and areas to the southwest and southeast of the metropolitan area near the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport. The most notable ones include Avenue Park, Fedha, Pipeline, Donholm, Greenfields, Nyayo, Taasia, Baraka, Nairobi West, Madaraka, Siwaka, South B, South C, Mugoya, Riverbank, Hazina, Buru Buru, Uhuru, Harambee Civil Servants', Akiba, Kimathi, Pioneer, and Koma Rock to the centre-east and Kasarani to northeast area among others. The low and lower income estates are located mainly in far eastern Nairobi. These include, Umoja, Kariokor, Dandora, Kariobangi, Embakasi, and Huruma. Kitengela suburb, though located further southeast, Ongata Rongai and Kiserian further southwest, and Ngong/Embulbul suburbs to the far west are considered part of the Greater Nairobi Metropolitan area. More than 90% of Nairobi residents work within the Nairobi Metropolitan area, in the formal and informal sectors. Many Somali immigrants have also settled in Eastleigh, nicknamed "Little Mogadishu". 

====Kibera slum====

Kibera slums being upgraded to New Apartment by the Kenyan Ministry of housing and United Nations Habitat
The Kibera slum in Nairobi, with an estimated population of 170,000 people, was thought to be Africa's second largest slum. However, recent census results have shown that Kibera is indeed much smaller than originally thought. 

Most of Kibera slum residents live in extreme poverty, earning less than $1.00 per day. Unemployment rates are high. Persons living with HIV in the slum are many, as are AIDS cases. Cases of assault and rape are common. There are few schools, and most people cannot afford an education for their children. Clean water is scarce and therefore diseases caused by related poor hygiene are prevalent. A great majority of people living in the slum lack access to healthcare.

The Government is addressing the problem, having initiated a programme to replace the slum with a residential district consisting of high rise apartments, and relocating the residents to these new buildings upon completion. The apartments are being built in phases in line with the Government's budgetary allocations, and a few apartments in phase 1 of the project have already been occupied.

===Parks and gardens===
Kenyatta Avenue with Uhuru Park between Upper Hill and the Nairobi CBD
Nairobi has many parks and open spaces throughout the city. Much of the city has dense tree-cover and plenty of green spaces. The most famous park in Nairobi is Uhuru Park. The park borders the central business district and the neighbourhood Upper Hill. Uhuru (Freedom in Swahili language) Park is a centre for outdoor speeches, services, and rallies. The park was to be built-over by former President Daniel arap Moi, who wanted the 62-storey headquarters of his party, the Kenya African National Union, situated in the park. However, the park was saved following a campaign by Nobel Peace Prize winner Wangari Maathai.

Central Park is adjacent to Uhuru Park, and includes a memorial for Jomo Kenyatta, the first president of Kenya. Other notable open spaces include Jeevanjee Gardens, City Park, 7 August Memorial Park, and Nairobi Arboretum.

==Political divisions==
The City of Nairobi enjoys the status of a full administrative County.

The Nairobi province differs in several ways from other Kenyan regions. The county is entirely urban. It has only one local council, Nairobi City Council. Nairobi Province was not divided into "districts" until 2007, when three districts were created. In 2010, along with the new constitution, Nairobi was renamed a County.

Nairobi County has seventeen constituencies. Constituency name may differ from division name, such that Starehe Constituency is equal to Central Division, Lang'ata Constituency to Kibera division, and Kamukunji Constituency to Pumwani Division in terms of boundaries.

===Constituencies===
Co-operative Bank of Kenya headquartersNairobi is divided into seventeen constituencies and eighty five wards, [http://www.iebc.or.ke/index.php/resources/downloads/item/final-constituencies-and-wards-description ] mostly named after residential estates. Kibera Division, for example, includes Kibera (Kenya's largest slum) as well as affluent estates of Karen and Langata.

 Constituency Wards 
 Westlands Kitisuru Parklands/Highridge Karura Kangemi Mountain View 
 Dagoretti North Kilimani Kawangware Gatina Kileleshwa Kabiro 
 Dagoretti South Mutu-ini Ngand'o Riruta Uthiru/Ruthimitu Waithaka 
 Langata Karen Nairobi West Mugumo-ini South C Nyayo Highrise 
 Kibra Laini Saba Lindi Makina Woodley/ Kenyatta Golf Course Sarang'ombe 
 Roysambu Githurai Kahawa West Zimmermann Roysambu Kahawa 
 Kasarani Clay City Mwiki Kasarani Njiru Ruai 
 Ruaraka Babadogo Utalii Mathare North Lucky Summer Korogocho 
 Embakasi South Imara Daima Kwa Njenga Kwa Reuben Pipeline Kware 
 Embakasi North Kariobangi North Dandora Area I Dandora Area II Dandora Area III Dandora Area IV 
 Embakasi Central Kayole North Kayole NorthCentral Kayole South Komarock Matopeni/ Spring Valley 
 Embakasi East Upper Savanna Lower Savanna Embakasi Utawala Mihang'o 
 Embakasi West Umoja I Umoja II Mowlem Kariobangi South 
 Makadara Maringo/ Hamza Viwandani Harambee Makongeni 
 Kamukunji Pumwani Eastleigh North Eastleigh South Airbase California 
 Starehe Nairobi Central Ngara Pangani Ziwani/ Kariokor Landimawe Nairobi South 
 Mathare Hospital Mabatini Huruma Ngei Mlango Kubwa Kiamaiko 

==Economy==

I&M Bank headquarters in Nairobi.
Nairobi is home to the Nairobi Stock Exchange (NSE), one of Africa's largest. The NSE was officially recognised as an overseas stock exchange by the London Stock Exchange in 1953. The exchange is Africa's 4th largest in terms of trading volumes, and 5th largest in terms of Market Capitalization as a percentage of GDP. 

Nairobi is the regional headquarters of several international companies and organisations. In 2007, General Electric, Young & Rubicam, Google, Coca-Cola, Airtel, and Cisco Systems relocated their African headquarters to the city. The United Nations Office at Nairobi hosts UNEP and UN-Habitat headquarters.

Several of Africa's largest companies are headquartered in Nairobi. KenGen, which is the largest African stock outside South Africa, is based in the city. Kenya Airways, Africa's fourth largest airline, uses Nairobi's Jomo Kenyatta International Airport as a hub.

Goods manufactured in Nairobi include clothing, textiles, building materials, processed foods, beverages, and cigarettes. Several foreign companies have factories based in and around the city. These include Goodyear, General Motors, Toyota Motors, and Coca Cola.

Nairobi has a large tourist industry, being both a tourist destination and a transport hub. 

===Central business district and skyline===
Nairobi has grown around its central business district. This takes a rectangular shape, around the Uhuru Highway, Haille Selassie Avenue, Moi Avenue, and University Way. It features many of Nairobi's important buildings, including the City Hall and Parliament Building. The city square is also located within the perimeter.

Most of the skyscrapers in this region are the headquarters of businesses and corporations, such as I&M and the Kenyatta International Conference Centre. The United States Embassy bombing took place in this district, prompting the building of a new embassy building in the suburbs.

In 2011, the city was considered to be about 4 million residents. A large beautification project took place in the Central Business District, as the city prepared to host the 2006 Afri-Cities summit. Iconic buildings such as the Kenyatta International Conference Centre had their exteriors cleaned and repainted. 

Nairobi downtown area or central business district is bordered to the southwest by Uhuru Park and Central Park. The Mombasa to Kampala railway runs to the southeast of the district.

===Upper Hill===

Today, many businesses are considering relocating and /or establishing their headquarters outside the Central Business District area. This is because land is cheaper, and better facilities can easily be built and maintained elsewhere. Two areas that are seeing a growth in companies and office space are Upper Hill, which is located, approximately 4 km from the Central Business District and Westlands, which is also about the same distance, away from the city centre.

Companies that have moved from the Central Business District to Upper Hill include Citibank and in 2007, Coca-Cola began construction of their East and Central African headquarters in Upper Hill, cementing the district as the preferred location for office space in Nairobi. The largest office development in this area is the Rahimtulla Tower, which is primarily occupied by British firm PriceWaterhouseCoopers. World Bank is also located in Upper Hill at Hill Park Building. Earlier on, they were located in View Park towers in the Central Business District. The International Finance Corporation – part of the World Bank Group focused on private sector development – is also located in Upper Hill at the CBA building.

To accommodate the large demand for floorspace in Nairobi, various commercial projects are being constructed. New business parks are being built in the city, including the flagship Nairobi Business Park. Nairobi is currently being considered by a company from the Middle East interested in building a high-rise headquarters in Africa.

A view of Nairobi from the Kenyatta International Conference Centre

* See also:List of tallest buildings in Nairobi 
 Nairobi's tallest skyscrapers 
 Times Tower 140 m 
 Teleposta Towers 120 m 
 Kenyatta International Conference Centre 105 m 
 NSSF Building 103 m 
 I&M Bank Tower 100 m 
 Government Office Conference Hall 98 m 
 Nyayo House 84 m 
 Rahimtulla Tower 

===Tourism===
A giraffe at Nairobi National Park, with Nairobi's skyline in background.
Nairobi is the one of the few cities in the world with a national park within its boundaries, making it a prime tourist destination as well, with several other tourist attractions. The most famous is the Nairobi National Park. The national park is unique in being the only game-reserve of this nature to border a capital city, or any major city. The park contains many animals including lions, giraffes, and black rhinos. The park is home to over 400 species of birds. The Nairobi Safari Walk is a major attraction to the Nairobi National Park as it offers a rare on-foot experience of the animals. 

Nairobi is home to several museums, sites, and monuments. The Nairobi National Museum is the country's National Museum and largest in the city. It houses a large collection of artefacts portraying Kenya's rich heritage through history, nature, culture, and contemporary art. It also includes the full remains of a homo erectus popularly known as the Turkana boy. Other prominent museums include the Nairobi Gallery, Nairobi Railway Museum, and the Karen Blixen Museum located in the affluent Karen suburb. Uhuru Gardens, a national monument and the largest memorial park in Kenya, is also the place where the first Kenyan flag was raised at independence. It is located along Langata road near the Wilson Airport.

Nairobi is nicknamed the Safari Capital of the World or the City Under the Sun, and has many hotels to cater for safari-bound tourists. Five star hotels in Nairobi include the Nairobi Serena, Laico Regency (formerly Grand Regency Hotel), Windsor (Karen), Holiday Inn, Nairobi Safari Club (Lilian Towers), The Stanley Hotel, Safari Park & Casino, InterContinental, Panari Hotel, Hilton, and the Norfolk Hotel. Other newer ones include the Crowne Plaza Hotel Nairobi in Upper Hill area, the Sankara Nairobi in Westlands, Tribe Hotel-Village Market, House of Wayne, The Eastland Hotel, Ole Sereni, and The Boma located along Mombasa Highway. International chains apart from the Hilton, the Intercontinental group, and Serena Hotels are also setting up prime properties in Nairobi city. Upcoming establishments include Radisson Blu, which nears completion. The Best Western Premier-Nairobi and The Villa Rosa Kempinski have recently been completed and opened.

Westlands at night
Nairobi is also home to the largest ice rink in Africa: the Solar Ice Rink at the Panari Hotel's Sky Centre. The rink, opened in 2005, covers 15000 sqft and can accommodate 200 people. 

Shopping malls in Nairobi include; The Yaya Centre (Hurlingham), Sarit Centre (Westlands), Westgate Shopping Mall (Westlands), ABC Place (Westlands), The Village Market (Gigiri), Junction Shopping Mall (Ngong Road), Prestige Plaza (Ngong Road), Crossroads Shopping Centre (Karen), and T-Mall (Langata). Nakumatt, Uchumi, and Tuskys are the largest supermarket chains with modern stores throughout the city.

The Nairobi Java House is a coffee house and restaurant chain with branches located around the city including one at the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport. Other coffee chains include Dormans Coffee House and Savannah which is part of Sasini Tea.

Nairobi's night life is very popular with tourists, both young and old. From a collection of gourmet restaurants offering local and international cuisine, Nairobi has something to offer to every age and pocket. Most common known food establishments include The Carnivore and The Tamarind Restaurants which have outlets in Langata, City Centre, and the Village Market. For those more discerning travellers, one can choose from a wide array of local cuisine, Mediterranean, fast food, Ethiopian, and Arabian. The city's nightlife is mostly centred along friends and colleagues meeting after work especially on Fridays – commonly known as "Furahiday" (Happy Day), theme nights, events and concerts, and Shisha cafés. The most popular clubbing spots are centred in upmarket Westlands which has come to be known as "Electric Avenue", Karen, Langata, Hurlingham, and "uptown" venues in the city centre. Nairobians generally go out every day of the week and most establishments are open till late.

Other sites include Jomo Kenyatta's Mausoleum, Kenya National Theatre, and the Kenya National Archives. Art galleries in Nairobi include the Rahimtulla Museum of Modern Art (Ramoma), the Mizizi Arts Centre, and the Nairobi National Museum.

===Places of interest===

* The Carnivore 
* Florida Discothèque
* Oloo's Children Center in Kibera Slum
* Nairobi National Park
* Nairobi National Museum
* Uhuru Garden
* David Sheldrick Centre
* Giraffe Centre
* Bomas of Kenya
* Karen Blixen Museum
* The National Council of Churches of Kenya HQ, Hurlingham 

==Demographics==

Population of Nairobi between 1906 and 2009.

Colors=
 id:lightgrey value:gray(0.9)
 id:darkgrey value:gray(0.7)
 id:sfondo value:rgb(1,1,1)
 id:barra value:rgb(0.3,0.5,0.7)

ImageSize = width:1000 height:300
PlotArea = left: 60 bottom: 30 top: 20 right: 60
DateFormat = x.y
Period = from:0 till:3500000
TimeAxis = orientation:vertical
AlignBars = late
ScaleMajor = gridcolor:darkgrey increment:500000 start:0
ScaleMinor = gridcolor:lightgrey increment:100000 start:0
BackgroundColors = canvas:sfondo

BarData=
 bar:1906 text:1906
 bar:1911 text:1911
 bar:1921 text:1921
 bar:1931 text:1931
 bar:1939 text:1939
 bar:1948 text:1948
 bar:1955 text:1955
 bar:1960 text:1960
 bar:1965 text:1965
 bar:1969 text:1969
 bar:1979 text:1979
 bar:1989 text:1989
 bar:1995 text:1995
 bar:1999 text:1999
 bar:2005 text:2005
 bar:2009 text:2009

PlotData=
 color:barra width:20 align:left

 bar:1906 from: 0 till:11500
 bar:1911 from: 0 till:14000
 bar:1921 from: 0 till:24300
 bar:1931 from: 0 till:47800
 bar:1939 from: 0 till:61300
 bar:1948 from: 0 till:119000
 bar:1955 from: 0 till:186000
 bar:1960 from: 0 till:251000
 bar:1965 from: 0 till:380000
 bar:1969 from: 0 till:509300
 bar:1979 from: 0 till:827775
 bar:1989 from: 0 till:1324570
 bar:1995 from: 0 till:1810000
 bar:1999 from: 0 till:2143254
 bar:2005 from: 0 till:2750561
 bar:2009 from: 0 till:3138369
PlotData=
 bar:1906 at:11500 fontsize:M text: 11,500 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1911 at:14000 fontsize:M text: 14,000 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1921 at:24300 fontsize:M text: 24,300 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1931 at:47800 fontsize:M text: 47,800 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1939 at:61300 fontsize:M text: 61,300 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1948 at:119000 fontsize:M text: 119,000 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1955 at:186000 fontsize:M text: 186,000 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1960 at:251000 fontsize:M text: 251,000 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1965 at:380000 fontsize:M text: 380,000 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1969 at:509300 fontsize:M text: 509,300 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1979 at:827775 fontsize:M text: 827,775 shift:(-20,5)
 bar:1989 at:1324570 fontsize:M text: 1,324,570 shift:(-30,5)
 bar:1995 at:1810000 fontsize:M text: 1,810,000 shift:(-30,5)
 bar:1999 at:2143254 fontsize:M text: 2,143,254 shift:(-30,5)
 bar:2005 at:2750561 fontsize:M text: 2,750,561 shift:(-43,5)
 bar:2009 at:3138369 fontsize:M text: 3,138,369 shift:(-43,5)

TextData=
 fontsize:S pos:(60,10)
 text:Population of Nairobi City

Nairobi has experienced one of the highest growth rates of any city in Africa. Since its foundation in 1899, Nairobi has grown to become the largest city in East Africa, despite being the youngest city in the region. The growth rate of Nairobi is currently 4.1%. It is estimated that Nairobi's population will reach 5 million in 2025. Build cities to contain population explosion 

These data fit remarkably closely (r^2 = 0.9994) to a logistic curve with t(0) = 1900, P(0)=8500, r = 0.059 and K = 8,000,000. This suggests a current (2011) growth rate of 3.5% (the CIA estimate of 4.5% cited above would have been true in 2005). According to this curve, the population of the city will be below 4 million in 2015, and will reach 5 million in 2025.

==Society and culture==
Jamia Mosque

Nairobi is a cosmopolitan and multicultural city. The names of some of its suburbs, including Hurlingham and Parklands reflect Nairobi's early history.

By the mid twentieth century, many foreigners settled in Nairobi from other British-occupied regions, primarily India and parts of (present-day) Pakistan. These immigrants were workers who arrived to construct the Kampala – Mombasa railway, settling in Nairobi after its completion, and also merchants from Gujarat. Nairobi also has established communities from Somalia and Sudan. 

Nairobi has a diverse and multicultural composition, there are a number of churches, mosques, temples, and gurdwaras within the city. Prominent places of worship in Nairobi include the Cathedral Basilica of the Holy Family, All Saints Cathedral, Ismaili Jamat Khana, and Jamia Mosque.

Nairobi has two informal nicknames. The first is "The Green City in the Sun", which is derived from the city's foliage and warm climate. The second is the "Safari Capital of the World", which is used due to Nairobi's prominence as a hub for safari tourism. 

There are a number of shopping malls in the Nairobi Area. These include: The West Gate mall, Prestige Plaza, the Village Market, the Sarit Center, the Junction. A variety of amenities are provided at these malls and include: cinemas, fashion and apparel retailers, bookshops, electronics and grocery stores, coffeehouses, restaurants and bars.

===Literature and film===
Nairobi Cinema
Kwani? is Kenya's first literary journal and was established by writers living in Nairobi. Nairobi's publishing houses have also produced the works of some of Kenya's authors, including Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o, Meja Mwangi who were all part of the post-colonial writing boom.

Many film makers also practice their craft out of Nairobi. Film-making is still young in the country, but people like producer Njeri Karago and director Judy Kibinge are paving the way for others.

Perhaps the most famous book and film set in Nairobi is Out of Africa. The book was written by Karen Blixen (pen name Isak Dinesen), and it is her account of living in Kenya. Karen Blixen lived in the Nairobi area from 1917 to 1931 (the neighbourhood in which she lived, Karen, is named after her).

In 1985, Out of Africa was made into a film, directed by Sydney Pollack. The film won 28 awards, including 7 Academy Awards. The popularity of the film prompted the opening of Nairobi's Karen Blixen Museum.

Nairobi is also the setting of many of the novels of Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o, Kenya's foremost writer.

Nairobi has been the set of several other American and British films. The most recent of these was The Constant Gardener (2005), a large part of which was filmed in the city. The story revolves around a British diplomat in Nairobi whose wife is murdered in northern Kenya. Much of the filming was in the Kibera slum.

Among the latest Kenyan actors in Hollywood who identify with Nairobi is Lupita Nyong'o. Lupita received an Oscar award for best supporting actress in her role as Patsy in the film 12 Years a Slave during the 86th Academy Awards at the Dolby theatre in Los Angeles. Lupita is the daughter of prominent Kenyan politician Peter Anyang' Nyong'o

Most new Hollywood films are nowadays screened at Nairobi's cinemas. Up until the early 1990s, there were only a few film theatres and the repertoire was limited. There are also two drive-in cinemas in Nairobi.

===Food===
In Nairobi, there is a range of eating-out places to choose from and besides being home to "nyama choma" which is a local term used to refer to roasted beef, there are fast food restaurants such as KFC, which is popular, and the longer established South African chains, Galitos and Steers. Coffee houses, doubling up as restaurants, mostly frequented by the upper middle classes, such as Artcaffe, Java Coffee House and Dormans have become increasingly popular in recent days. Traditional food joints such as the popular K'osewe's in the city centre and Amaica, which specialise in African delicacies are also widepsread. The Kenchic franchise which specialises in old-school chicken and chips meals is also popular, particularly among the lower classes and students, with restaurants all over the city and its suburbs. High class restaurants specialising in specific cuisines, ranging from Italian, Lebanese, Ethiopian, French and seafood are more likely to be found in five star hotels and the wealthier suburbs in the West and South of the city.

===Music===
Nairobi is the centre of the Kenyan music scene. Benga is a Kenyan genre which was developed in Nairobi. The genre is a fusion of jazz and Luo music forms.

In the 1970s, Nairobi became the prominent centre for East and Central African music. During this period, Nairobi was established as a hub of soukous music. This genre was born in Kinshasa and Brazzaville. After the political climate in the region deteriorated, many Congolese artists relocated to Nairobi. Artists such as Orchestra Super Mazembe moved from Congo to Nairobi and found great success. 
 Virgin records became aware of the popularity of the genre and signed recording contracts with several soukous artists.

More recently, Nairobi has become the centre of the Kenyan hip hop scene, with Kalamashaka, Gidi Gidi Majimaji being the pioneers of urban music in Kenyan. The genre has become very popular amongst local youth, and domestic musicians have become some of the most popular in the region. Successful artists based in Nairobi include Jua Cali, Nonini, Camp Mulla, Juliani, Eric Wainaina, Suzanna Owinyo and Nameless. Popular Record labels include Ogopa DJs, Grand Pa Records, Main Switch, Red Black and Green Republik, Calif Records and Bornblack Music Group.

Many foreign musicians who tour Africa perform in Nairobi. Bob Marley's first-ever visit to Africa started in Nairobi. Acts that have performed in Nairobi include Lost Boyz, Wyclef Jean, Shaggy, Akon, Eve, T.O.K, Sean Paul, Wayne Wonder, Alaine, Konshens, Ja Rule, and Morgan Heritage, and Cabo Snoop. Other international musicians who have performed in Nairobi include the rocking show by Don Carlos, Demarco, Busy Signal, Mr. Vegas and the Elephant man crew.

Nairobi, including the coastal towns of Mombasa and Diani, have recently become the centre of Electronic Dance Music (EDM) in Kenya, which includes Trance, Techno, House, Progressive, Drum & Bass, and Dubstep. Prominent international composers & DJs have graced their presence in these cities, including Kyau & Albert, Solarity, Ronski Speed, and Boom Jinx.

Many nightclubs in and around the city have witnessed a growth in the population that exclusively listen to Electronic Dance Music, especially amongst the younger generations. These youth also support many local EDM producers & DJs, such as Jahawi, Mikhail Kuzi, HennessyLive, Trancephilic5 Jack Rooster as well as up and comers such as L.A Dave, Raj El Rey, Leeam Tom Parker and more.

Gospel music is also very popular in Nairobi just as in the rest of Kenya, with gospel artistes having a great impact in the mostly Christian city . Artistes such as Esther Wahome, Eunice Njeri, Daddy Owen, Emmy Kosgei and the late Angela Chibalonza, among others, have a great pull over the general population while others like MOG, Juliani, Ecko dyda, DK Kwenye Beat have great influence over the younger generation. Their concerts are also very popular and they have as much influence as the great secular artistes.The most popular being Groove tours,TSO(Totally Sold Out) new year concerts.

==Sport==
Nairobi is East Africa's sporting centre. The premier sports facility in Nairobi and generally in Kenya is the Moi International Sports Centre in the suburb of Kasarani. The complex was completed in 1987, and was used to host the 1987 All Africa Games. The complex comprises a 60,000 seater stadium, the second largest in East Africa (after Tanzania's new national stadium), a 5,000 seater gymnasium, and a 2,000 seater aquatics centre. 

The Nyayo National Stadium is Nairobi's second largest stadium renowned for hosting global rugby event under the "Safaricom Sevens." Completed in 1983, the stadium has a capacity of 30,000. 
 This stadium is primarily used for football. The facility is located close to the Central Business District, which makes it a convenient location for political gatherings.

Nairobi City Stadium is the city's first stadium, and used for club football. Nairobi Gymkhana is the home of the Kenyan cricket team, and was a venue for the 2003 Cricket World Cup. Notable annual events staged in Nairobi include Safari Rally (although it lost its World Rally Championship status in 2003), Safari Sevens rugby union tournament, and Nairobi Marathon.

Football is the most popular sport in the city by viewership and participation. This is highlighted by the number of football clubs in the city, including Mathare United, AFC Leopards, Gor Mahia, and Tusker FC.

There are six golf courses within a 20 km radius of Nairobi. 
 The oldest 18-hole golf course in the city is the Royal Nairobi Golf Club, founded in 1906 by the British, just seven years after the city was founded. Other notable golf clubs include the Windsor Country Club, Karen Country Club, and Muthaiga Country Club. The Kenya Open golf tournament, which is part of the Challenge Tour, takes place in Nairobi. The Ngong Racecourse in Nairobi is the center of horse racing in Kenya. The Standard, 3 April 2009: Kenya Derby is main Jockey Club of Kenya event 

==Education==
The Majority of schools follow either the Kenyan Curriculum or the British Curriculum. There is also International School of Kenya which follows the North American Curriculum and the German school in Gigiri.

===Higher education===

Nairobi is home to several universities.
* The University of Nairobi is the largest and oldest university in Kenya. It was established in 1956, as part of the University of East Africa, but became an independent university in 1970. The university has approximately 55,000 students. 
* Kenyatta University is situated 16 km from Nairobi on the Nairobi – Thika dual carriageway on 1100 acre of land. The university was chartered in 1985, offering mainly education-related courses, but has since diversified, offering medicine, environmental studies, engineering, law, business, agriculture, and economics. It has a student body of about 32,000, the bulk of whom (17,000) are in the main (Kahawa) campus. Currently it is one of the fastest growing public universities.
* Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology (JKUAT) is a public university near Nairobi, Kenya. It is situated in Juja, 36 kilometres northeast of Nairobi, along Nairobi-Thika Highway. It offers courses in Agriculture, Engineering, Science, Architecture, and Building sciences. The university has a strong research interest in the areas of biotechnology and engineering.
* Multimedia University of Kenya or MMU is a university located 25 KM South of Nairobi in the rich and leafy suburb of Karen area adjoining CUEA. MMU is a fairly young and comparatively small institution. It emphasises that it is the top ranking public university in Kenya in ICT excellence. However, the ranking is based on the webometrics system which mainly looks into the quality of the web presence and not in the quality of teaching or research of a higher education institution. It is the training centre for the Kenya ICT Board for SAP Skills and for the Africa program whose main purpose is to train African university graduates in software engineering. MMU is going to be involved in the development of Konza Technology City.MMU Kenya together with other universities, e.g. the Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture, Science and Technology and Strathmore University's iLab Africa, is to accelerate the development of Kenya's Information and Knowledge sectors.
* Strathmore University started in 1961 as an Advanced Level (UK) Sixth Form College offering Science and Arts subjects. The college started to admit accountancy students in March 1966, and thus became a university. In January 1993, Strathmore College merged with Kianda College and moved to Ole Sangale Road, Madaraka Estate, Nairobi.
* United States International University – Nairobi is a branch of the United States International University, which has campuses across the world. The Nairobi campus was established in 1969. The university has accreditation from the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, in USA, and the Government of Kenya. It is located in a quiet west side location of Kasarani area north-central Nairobi opposite the Safari Park Hotel.
* Daystar University is a Christian liberal arts university located in Athi River, an outlying town south-east of Nairobi, with a satellite campus on Nairobi's Ngong Road.
* In 2005, The Aga Khan Hospital, Nairobi was upgraded to a health sciences teaching hospital, providing post graduate education in medicine and surgery including nursing education, henceforth renamed the Aga Khan University Hospital.
* The University of Eastern Africa, Baraton (UEAB), located in Eldoret, Kenya. It offers various degrees in a number of graduate and undergraduate programs in the fields of Business, the Humanities, Agriculture, Technology, Health Sciences, and Education. Baraton University was the first private University to receive a Charter granted by the republic of Kenya on 28 March 1991. The University is also a member of the Inter-University Council for East Africa, The Association of Commonwealth Universities, and the Association of African Universities.
* The Catholic University of Eastern Africa located in Langata suburb, obtained its "Letter of Interim Authority" in 1989. Following negotiations between the Authority of the Graduate School of Theology and the Commission for Higher Education (CHIEA), the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences was established three years later, culminating in the granting of the Civil Charter to CHIEA on 3 November 1992.
* The Africa Nazarene University, located in Ongata Rongai, is a private chartered Christian university sponsored by the Church of the Nazarene International and it is a member of the worldwide family of Nazarene institutions.
* The Mt Kenya University, located in Thika, is a private university. The idea behind the establishment of the University dates back to 1996 when the precursor of the University, the Thika Institute of Technology was founded as a Computer Outreach Program. It has set up satellite campuses in major towns and cities most notably Nairobi, Mombasa, Nakuru, Eldoret, Kakamega, Meru, Mumias, Lodwar, Kitale and has a virtual campus for distance learning. MKU has also opened campuses in the region, South Sudan and Rwanda.
* The Presbyterian University of East Africa (PUEA) is a private university operated by the Presbyterian Church, running under a letter of interim authority awaiting a charter. Its main campus is in Kikuyu Town approximately 20 km from Nairobi. It however has two Campuses in the city offering various courses.

==Infrastructure==

===Transport===
Major plans are being implemented in the need to decongest the city's traffic and the completion of Thika Road has given the city a much needed face-lift attributed to road's enhancement of global standards. Several projects have been completed (Syokimau Rail Station, Thika Road Bypass) while numerous other projects are still underway. The country's head of state announced (when he opened Syokimau Rail Service) that Kenya was collaborating with other countries in the region to develop railway infrastructure to improve regional connectivity under the ambitious LAPPSET project which is the single largest and most expensive in the continent.

Kenya has signed a bilateral agreement with Uganda to facilitate joint development of the Mombasa-Malaba-Kampala standard gauge railway. A branch line will also be extended to Kisumu.

Similarly, Kenya signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Government of Ethiopia for the development of Lamu-Addis Ababa standard gauge railway. Under the Lamu-South Sudan and Ethiopia Transport Corridor Project, the development of a railway component is among the priority projects.

The development of these critical transport facilities will, besides reducing transport costs due to faster movement of goods and people within the region, also increase trade, improve the socio-economic welfare of Northern Kenya and boost the country's potential in attracting investments from all over the world.

Jomo Kenyatta International Airport
====Airports====
Nairobi is served primarily by Jomo Kenyatta International Airport. It is the largest airport in East and Central Africa. The airport served 5,803,635 passengers in 2011, making it the ninth-busiest airport in Africa by total passengers.The airport is a major transit hub for passengers flying to East Africa's natural attractions, and other smaller cities in East and Central Africa. The airport is situated 20 km from Nairobi's Central Business District. The airport directly serves intercontinental passengers from Europe and Asia. Recently, the airport was upgraded by the world aviation regulatory body, ICAO, and major plans are underway to expand the airport to accommodate growing air traffic and to cater for direct flights to far flung destinations such as the United States and Canada. Also, a debate is underway in government for a plan to add a second runway at the airport. However, this idea has not yet been ratified and approved by the Cabinet of the Kenya government. 

Wilson Airport is a smaller and busy general aviation airport located in a south-central suburb of Nairobi West. It handles small aircraft that generally operate within Kenya, although some offer services to other East, Central and North-east African destinations.

Eastleigh Airport was the original landing strip in the pre-jet airline era. It was used as a landing point in the 1930s and 1940s British passenger and mail route from Southampton to Cape Town. This route was served by flying boats between Britain and Kisumu and then by land-based aircraft on the routes to the south. The airport is now a military base.

====Matatu====
Matatus are the most common form of public transport in Nairobi.
Matatu, which literally translates to "three cents for a ride" (nowadays much more) are privately owned minibuses, and the most popular form of local transport, and generally seat fourteen to twenty-four. Matatus ama (or) mathree operate within Nairobi, its environs and suburbs and from Nairobi to other towns around the country. The matatu's destination is imprinted along a yellow stripe on the side of the bus, and matatus plying specific routes have specific route numbers. Matatus in Nairobi were easily distinguishable by their extravagant paint schemes, as owners would paint their matatu with various colourful decorations, such as their favourite football team or hip hop artist. More recently, some have even painted Barack Obama's face on their vehicle. They are notorious for their poor safety records, which are a result of overcrowding and reckless driving. Matatu drivers are pressured to make as many round trips as possible to maximise profits for their operator. Due to the intense competition between matutus, many are equipped with powerful sound systems and television screens to attract more customers.

However, in 2004, a law was passed requiring all matatus to include seat belts and speed governors and to be painted with a yellow stripe. At first, this caused a furore amongst Matatu operators, but they were pressured by government and the public to make the changes. Matatus are now limited to 80 km/h.
In December 2010, the Government embarked on a policy to phase out matatus as a means of public transport. Consequently no new matatus are licensed to operate from January 2011 while the current ones will be allowed to live out their lifespan; a move aimed at enhancing the safety of citizens and visitors as well.

====Buses====
Buses are increasingly becoming common in the city with some even going to the extents of installing complimentary WiFi systems in partnership with the leading mobile service provider. There are four major bus companies operating the city routes and are the traditional Kenya Bus Service (KBS), and newer private operators Citi Hoppa, Compliant MOA and Double M. The Citi Hoppa buses are distinguishable by their green livery, the Double M buses are painted purple, Compliant MOA by their distinctively screaming names and mix of white, blue colours while the KBS buses are painted blue.
Public Transport in Nairobi

Companies such as; Easy Coach, Crown Bus, Coast Bus, Modern Coast, Eldoret Express, Chania,the Guardian Angel,Spanish and Mash Poa run
scheduled buses and luxury coaches to other cities and towns.

====Smartbus====
Smartbus-Kenya is the latest bus operator in Kenya and serves Nairobi and the areas around it. Presently, the company operates buses to Kitengela, Kiserian, Rongai, and Ngong. Passengers have a smartcard which they must swipe to gain access to the vehicle. Passengers top up their smartcard and the fare is deducted from the amount of money in the account. The fare is determined by the point at which the passenger enters and the point at which the passenger exits the bus.

====Trains====
Nairobi was founded as a railway town, and the main headquarters of Kenya Railways (KR) is still situated at Nairobi railway station, which is located near the city centre. The line runs through Nairobi, from Mombasa to Kampala. Its main use is freight traffic, but regular nightly passenger trains connect Nairobi to Mombasa and Kisumu. A number of morning and evening commuter trains connect the centre with the suburbs, but the city has no proper light rail, tramway, or rapid transit lines. A proposal has been passed for the construction of a commuter rail line.
The country's third president since independence, President Mwai Kibaki on Tuesday, 13 November 2012 launched the Syokimau Rail Service marking a major milestone in the history of railway development in the country.
The opening of the station marked another milestone in efforts to realise various projects envisaged under the Vision 2030 Economic Blueprint. The new station has a train that ferries passengers from Syokimau to the city centre cutting travel time by half.
Opening of the station marks the completion of the first phase of the Sh24b Nairobi Commuter Rail Network that is geared at easing traffic congestion in Nairobi, blamed for huge economic losses.

After the completion of the Syokimau Station, focus will be put on building other nine modern stations including those on Jogoo Road, Imara Daima and Makadara Estate.

====Taxi====
Taxis are available in most parts of the city. They are costly in comparison to matatus and buses but are a safer and more convenient form of transport. They park outside most hotels, at taxi ranks in the city centre, and at shopping malls.

====Roads====
Nairobi is served by highways that link Mombasa to Kampala in Uganda and Arusha in Tanzania. These are earmarked to ease the daily motor traffic within and surrounding the metro area. However, driving in Nairobi is chaotic. Most of the roads are tarmacked and there are signs showing directions to certain neighbourhoods. The city is connected to the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport by the Mombasa Highway, which passes through Industrial Area, South B, South C and Embakasi. Ongata Rongai, Langata and Karen are connected to the city centre by Langata Road, which runs to the south. Lavington, Riverside, Westlands, etc. are connected by Waiyaki Way. Kasarani, Eastlands, and Embakasi are connected by Thika Road, Jogoo Road, and Outer Ring Road.

Highways connect the city with other major towns such as Mombasa, Machakos, Voi, (A109), Kisumu, Nakuru, Eldoret, Namanga Border Tanzania(A104) etc.

Nairobi is currently undergoing major road constructions to update its infrastructure network. The new systems of roads, flyovers, and bridges would cut outrageous traffic levels caused the inability of the current infrastructure to cope with the soaring economic growth in the past few years. It is also a major component of Kenya's Vision 2030 and Nairobi Metropolis plans. Most roads now, though, are well lit and surfaced with adequate signage.
The proposed Nairobi Bypasses are currently under construction by the Kenyan government and financed by Chinese Government. Their construction seeks to ease congestion in Nairobi's downtown area and the surrounding suburbs.
The Bypasses will comprise the:
* Northern bypass – linking Limuru road to Thika Road
* Eastern bypass – linking Mombasa road to Ruiru-Kiambu road near Kamiti prison
* Southern bypass – run from Kikuyu to Mombasa road via Ngong road & Langata

===Water supply and sanitation===

94% of the piped water supply for Nairobi comes from rivers and reservoirs in the Aberdare Range north of the city, of which the reservoir of the Thika Dam is the most important one. Water distribution losses – technically called non-revenue water – are 40%, and only 40% of those with house connections receive water continuously. Slum residents receive water through water kiosks and end up paying much higher water prices than those fortunate enough to have access to piped water at their residence. In the middle of a severe drought, the board of the Nairobi City Water and Sewerage Company was sacked July 2009 for "malpractices", following the publication of a report by Transparency International-Kenya and the Kenyan NGO Maji Na Ufanisi (Water and Development). The report had found cases of bribery for illegal connections, tampering with meter readings, and diversion of water from domestic users to industries in five cities, with the highest incidence of bribery in Nairobi. 

===Housing===
Nairobi Metro MapNairobi County (red)Kajiado County (green) Machakos County (yellow) Kiambu County (purple)
There is wide variety regarding standards of living in Nairobi. Most wealthy Kenyans live in Nairobi, but the majority of Nairobians are average and poor. Half of the population have been estimated to live in slums which cover just 5% of the city area. The growth of these slums is a result of urbanisation, poor town planning, and the unavailability of loans for low income earners. 

Kibera is one of the largest slums in Africa, and is situated to the west of Nairobi. (Kibera comes from the Nubian word Kibra, meaning "forest" or "jungle"). The slums cover two square kilometres and are on government land. Kibera has been the setting for several films, the most recent being The Constant Gardener.

Other notable slums include Mathare and Korogocho. Altogether, 66 areas are counted as slums within Nairobi. 

Many Nairobi non-slum-dwellers live in relatively good housing conditions. Large houses can be found in many of the upmarket neighbourhoods, especially to the west of Nairobi. Historically, British occupiers have settled in Gigiri, Muthaiga, Langata and Karen. Other middle and high income estates include Parklands, Westlands, Hurlingham, Kilimani, Milimani, Spring Valley, Lavington, Rosslyn, Kitisuru, and Nairobi Hill.

To accommodate the growing middle class, many new apartments and housing developments are being built in and around the city. The most notable development is Greenpark, at Athi River, Machakos County 25 km from Nairobi's Central Business District. Over 5,000 houses, villas and apartments are being constructed at this development, including leisure, retail and commercial facilities. The development is being marketed to families, as are most others within the city. Eastlands also houses most of the city's middle class and includes South C, South B, Embakasi, Buru Buru, Komarock, Donholm, June 2011, and various others.

==Crime and law enforcement==
Throughout the 1990s, Nairobi had struggled with rising crime, earning a reputation for being a dangerous city and the nickname "Nairobbery". In 2001, the United Nations International Civil Service Commission rated Nairobi as among the most insecure cities in the world, classifying the city as "status C". In the United Nations report, it was stated that in 2001, nearly one third of all Nairobi residents experienced some form of robbery in the city. The head of one development agency cited the notoriously high levels of violent armed robberies, burglaries, and carjackings. Crime had risen in Nairobi as a result of unplanned urbanisation, with a minimal number of police stations and a proper security infrastructure. However, many claim that the biggest factor for the city's alarming crime rate is police corruption, which leaves many criminals unpunished. As a security precaution, most large houses have a watch guard, burglar grills, and dogs to patrol their grounds during the night. Most crimes, however, occur around the poor neighbourhoods where it gets dangerous during night hours.

In 2006, crime decreased in the city, due to increased security and an improved police presence. Despite this, in 2007, the Kenyan government and US State Department have announced that Nairobi is experiencing a greater level of violent crime than in previous years. OSAC – Kenya 2007 Crime & Safety Report Since then, the government has taken measures to combat crime with heavy police presence in and around the city while US government has updated its travel warning for the country.

Following a grenade attack in October 2011 by a local Kenyan man, with terrorist links, the city faced a heightened security presence. Fears spread over further promised retaliations by the Al-Shabaab group of rebels over Kenya's involvement in a coordinated operation with the Somalian military against the insurgent outfit. 

There have been a spate of Blasts in Nairobi which started on 10 March 2012, where assailants threw grenades at a busy bus station and a blue-collar bar in Nairobi, killing nine and injuring more than 50. On 28 May 2012, 28 people were injured in an explosion in a shopping complex in downtown Nairobi, near Moi avenue. On 21 September 2013, Al-Shabaab-associated militants attacked the Westgate Mall. 67 people were killed. 

==Media==
Nation Center, headquarters of the Nation Media Group
Nairobi is home to most of Kenya's news and media organisations. The city is also home to East Africa's largest newspapers: the Daily Nation and The Standard. These are circulated within Kenya and cover a range of domestic and regional issues. Both newspapers are published in English.

Kenya Broadcasting Corporation, a state-run television and radio station, is headquartered in the city. Kenya Television Network is part of the Standard Group and was Kenya's first privately owned TV station. The Nation Media Group runs NTV which is based in Nairobi. East Africa Television Channel 5 is 24-hour music channel based in Dar es Salaam Tanzania and broadcasts in Uganda, Tanzania, and Kenya. There are also a number of prominent radio stations located in Kenya's capital including KISS 100, Capital FM, East FM, Kameme FM, Metro FM, and Family FM, among others.

Several multinational media organisations have their regional headquarters in Nairobi. These include the BBC, CNN, Agence France-Presse, Reuters, Deutsche Welle, and the Associated Press. The East African bureau of CNBC Africa is located in Nairobi's city centre, while the Nairobi bureau of the New York Times is located in the suburb of Gigiri.

Nairobi is also home to the East African School of Media Studies due to its large media focus.

==Sister cities==

 Country City County/District/Province/Region/State Date 
 USA Denver Colorado 1975 
 USA Raleigh North Carolina - 
 Brazil Rio de Janeiro Rio de Janeiro (state) - 
 China Kunming Yunnan - 
 China Pingxiang Jiangxi 2013 
 Venezuela Colonia Tovar Aragua - 

==Image gallery==

File:NBO5.jpg| Nairobi Sunrise
File:Auditorium - Kenyatta International Conference Center.jpg| KICC Auditorium
File:State House Nairobi.jpg|State House
File:I&M Bank Tower.jpg|I&M Bank Tower
File:Nairobi city hall.jpg|Nairobi City Hall
File:Parliament Buildings, Nairobi, Kenya -entrance-15April2010.jpg|Entrance to Parliament
File:University of Nairobi.JPG|University of Nairobi
File:NSSF Building, Nairobi.JPG|NSSF Building
File:JOMO KENYATTA.JPG|Jomo Kenyatta Statue
File:Sunset in Nairobi.jpg|Sunset in Nairobi
File:Nairobi's skyline from Uhuru Park.jpg|Nairobi skyline as seen from Uhuru Park.
File:Anniversery towers.jpg|Anniversary Towers

==See also==

* International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology
* United Nations Environment Programme

==References==

==External links==

* The City Council of Nairobi (official website)
* National Museums of Kenya (official website)
* The Nairobi Social Audit Report
; News
* Daily Nation
* The Standard
* Latest News from Kenya

 


