[[Navarre]]

Navarre (; ; ), officially the Chartered Community of Navarre (Spanish: Comunidad Foral de Navarra ; Basque: Nafarroako Foru Komunitatea ), is an autonomous community in northern Spain, bordering the Basque Country, La Rioja, and Aragon in Spain and Aquitaine in France. The capital city is Pamplona (or Iruña in Basque).

==History==
Coins of Arsaos, Navarre, 150–100 BC, showing Rome's stylistic influence
Castle of Xabier 
===Antiquity===
During the Roman Empire, the Vascones, a pre-Roman tribe who populated the southern slopes of the Pyrenees, included the area which would ultimately become Navarre. In the mountainous north, the Vascones escaped large-scale Roman settlement, except for coastal areas&mdash;Oiasso (Gipuzkoa nowadays). Not so the flatter areas to the south, which were amenable to large-scale Roman farming&mdash;vineyards, olives, and wheat crops. 

===Kingdom of Navarre===

Neither the Visigoths nor the Franks ever completely subjugated the area. The Vascones (to become the Basques) included neighbouring tribes as of the 7th century. In AD 778, the Basques defeated a Frankish army at the Battle of Roncevaux Pass. Two generations later, in 824, the Basque chieftain Iñigo Arista was elected King of Pamplona supported by the muwallad Banu Qasi of Tudela, so establishing a Basque kingdom that developed and was later called Navarre. , p. 140-141. That kingdom reached its zenith during the reign of Sancho III of Navarre, comprising most of the Christian realms to the south of the Pyrenees, and even a short overlordship of Gascony (early 11th century).

When Sancho III died in 1035, the Kingdom of Navarre was divided between his sons. It never fully recovered its political power, while its commercial importance increased as traders and pilgrims (the Francs) poured into the kingdom throughout the Way of Saint James. In 1200 Navarre lost the key western Basque districts to Alphonse VIII of Castile, leaving the kingdom landlocked. Navarre then contributed with a small but symbolic force of 200 knights to the decisive Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212 against the Almohads.

The native line of kings came to an end in 1234, whose descendants intermarried with French dynasties. However, the Navarrese kept most of their strong laws and institutions. The death of Queen Blanche I of Navarre (1441) inaugurated a civil war period between the Beaumont and Agramont confederacies with the intervention of the Castilian-Aragonese House of Trastámara in Navarre's internal affairs. In 1512, Navarre was invaded by Ferdinand the Catholic's troops, , pp. 30-32 with the monarchs of Navarre Catherine and John III withdrawing to the north of the Pyrenees, and establishing a Kingdom of Navarre-Bearn, led by Queen Jeanne d'Albret as of 1555. 

To the south of the Pyrenees, Navarre was annexed to the Crown of Castile (1515), but keeping a separate ambiguous status, and a shaky balance up to 1610&mdash;King Henry ready to march over Spanish Navarre. A Chartered Government was established (the Diputación), and the kingdom managed to keep home rule. Tensions with the Spanish Government came to a head as of 1794, when Spanish premier Manuel Godoy attempted to suppress Navarrese and Basque self-government altogether, with the end of the First Carlist War definitely bringing the kingdom and its home rule (fueros) to an end (1839-1841).

===Spanish province===

After the 1839 Convention of Bergara, the Compromise Act (Ley Paccionada) was signed with representatives of the Chartered Government of Navarre in 1841, and the kingdom was made into a province in exchange for keeping a reduced version of home rule (fueros).

==Politics==
===Institutions and status=== 
After the end of Franco's dictatorship, Navarre became one of the 17 Autonomous Communities in Spain. The community ceremonies, education, and social services, together with housing, urban development, and environment protection policies are under the responsibility of Navarre's political institutions. 

As in the rest of communities, Navarre has a Parliament elected every four years, and the majority in this Parliament determines the president of the Community, who is in charge of Navarre's government. 

Unlike most other autonomous communities of Spain (but like the Basque Country), Navarre has almost full responsibility for collecting and administering taxes which must follow the overall guidelines established by the Spanish government but may have some minor differences.

The first 3 presidents of the community belonged to the extinct UCD party. After 1984 the government has been ruled by either the Partido Socialista de Navarra (PSN-PSOE, one of the federative components of the PSOE, main centre-left wing party in Spain) or the UPN (a Navarre-based party that had a long alliance with the PP, main right-wing party in Spain).

Basque nationalist parties also represent a sizeable part of the vote, and even a majority in some northern areas.

Basque nationalist parties have as a key point in their agendas to merge Navarre into the autonomous community of the Basque Country, which has more than 3 times the population of Navarre. All Spain-based parties, as well as UPN and PSN, oppose this move.

===Present-day political dynamics===
Politics in Navarre has been marked by fierce rivalry between Basque nationalist parties on the one side and the institutional parties, UPN and PSN, on the other. Basque nationalist parties are excluded from key political posts and institutions, and they point to the intervention of the Madrid government in internal affairs of Navarre. Since the establishment of Navarre's present status (the Amejoramiento, the 'Betterment'), the successive regional governments have been shaken by political instability and corruption scandals. The most stable and longest term in office was held by UPN's Miguel Sanz (2001-2011). 

Between 2012 and 2014, a series of corruption scandals broke out involving regional president Yolanda Barcina and other regional government officials that included influence peddling, embezzlement, misappropriation of funds and mismanagement leading to the bankruptcy of CAN, or ideological profiling of public school instructors (billed as "ETA supporting teachers"). By November 2012, the PSN&mdash;UPN's standing ally in Navarre up to that point&mdash;backed down on its support of UPN's Barcina, but refused to impeach her or search new political alliances, leaving a deadlocked government. 

The regional president, widely questioned in Navarre as of 2012 and relying only on the Conservative central government's backup and a number of media outlets in Madrid, went on to urge the Constitutional Tribunal to challenge several decisions made by the Parliament of Navarre. After the latest scandal and corruption allegations affecting a secretary of her cabinet (Lourdes Goicoechea, regional public finance secretary) in February 2014, the Spanish home office secretary Jorge Fernández Díaz&mdash;one refusing any dialogue or political moves in the Basque conflict&mdash;stepped in warning leading members of PSN that "Navarre is strategic for Spain", and asserting that any other political alliance means "supporting ETA". The Justice secretary in Madrid Alberto Ruiz Gallardón in turn stated that "the worst political error is not corruption" but getting along with Bildu. 

==Geography and climate==
Bardenas Reales 
European beech in Irati Forest. 

Navarre consists of 272 municipalities and has a total population of 601,874 (2006), of whom approximately one-third live in the capital, Pamplona (195,769 pop.), and one-half in the capital's metropolitan area (315,988 pop.). There are no other large municipalities in the region. The next largest are Tudela (32,802), Barañáin (22,401), Burlada (18,388), Estella - Lizarra (13,892), Zizur Mayor (13,197), Tafalla (11,040), Villava/Atarrabia (10,295), and Ansoáin (9,952).

Despite its relatively small size, Navarre features stark contrasts in geography, from the Pyrenees mountain range that dominates the territory to the plains of the Ebro river valley in the south. The highest point in Navarre is Mesa de los Tres Reyes, with an elevation of 2,428 metres (7,965 feet).
Other important mountains are Txamantxoia, Kartxela, the Larra-Belagua Massif, Sierra de Alaiz, Untzueko Harria, Sierra de Leyre, Sierra del Perdón, Montejurra, Ezkaba, Monte Ori, Sierra de Codés, Urbasa, Andia, and the Aralar Range.
In the north,climate is affected by the Atlantic Ocean leading an Oceanic west coast climate (Köppen: Cfb) At central Navarre the summer precipitations start to lower, leading to a Mediterranean climate (Köppen: Csa and Csb) At the southernmost part of Navarre the climate is cool semiarid (Köppen: Bsk)

==Cultural heritage==
Castle of Olite
Navarre is a mixture of its Vasconic tradition, the Trans-Pyrenean influx of people and ideas and Mediterranean influences coming from the Ebro. The Ebro valley is amenable to wheat, vegetables, wine, and even olive trees as in Aragon and La Rioja. It was a part of the Roman Empire, inhabited by the Vascones, later controlled on its southern fringes by the Muslims Banu Qasi, whose authority was taken over by the taifa kingdom of Tudela in the 11th century. 

During the Reconquista, Navarre gained little ground at the expense of the Muslims, since its southern boundary had already been established by the time of the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212. Starting in the 11th century, the Way of Saint James grew in importance. It brought pilgrims, traders and Christian soldiers from the North. Gascons and Occitanians from beyond the Pyrenees (called Franks) received self-government and other privileges to foster settlement in Navarrese towns, and they brought their crafts, culture and Romance languages. 

Jews and Muslims were persecuted both north and south of Navarre, expelled for the most part during the late 15th century to the early 16th century. The kingdom struggled to maintain its separate identity in 14th and 15th centuries, and after King Fernando forcibly annexed Navarre after the death of his wife Queen Isabella, he extended the Castilian expulsion and forcible integration orders applicable to conversos and mudejars of 1492 to the former kingdom. Therefore, Tudela in particular could no longer serve as a refuge after the Inquisitors were allowed.

==Energy policy==

Navarre leads Europe in its use of renewable energy technology and was planning to reach 100% renewable electricity generation by 2010. By 2004, 61% of the region's electricity was generated by renewable sources consisting of 43.6% from 28 wind farms, 12% from over 100 small-scale water turbines, and 5.3% from 2 biomass and 2 biogas plants. In addition, the region had what was then Spain's largest photovoltaic power plant at Montes de Cierzo de Tudela (1.2 MWp capacity) plus several hundred smaller photovoltaic installations.

Developments since 2004 have included further photovoltaic plants at Larrión (0.25 MWp) Iberinco to Construct Solar Installation at Renewable Facility | Renewable Energy Today | Find Articles at BNET and another at Castejón (2.44 MWp), also once the largest in Spain. 

==Languages==
Map showing density of Basque speakers, including second-language speakers
Spanish is the official language throughout Navarre. Basque also has official status in the Basque-speaking area. http://www.parlamentodenavarra.es/home.aspx The northwestern part of the community is largely Basque-speaking, while the southern part is entirely Spanish-speaking. The capital, Pamplona, is in the mixed region. Navarre is legally divided into three linguistic regions: regions where Basque is widespread and official (the Basque-speaking area), regions where Basque is present and has reduced official recognition (the mixed region), and regions where Basque is non-official. In 2006 11.1% of people in Navarre were Basque speakers, 7.6% were passive speakers and 81.3% were Spanish-speaking monolinguals, an increase from 9.5% Basque speakers in 1991. IV. Inkesta Soziolinguistikoa Gobierno Vasco, Servicio Central de Publicaciones del Gobierno Vasco 2008, ISBN 978-84-457-2775-1 The age distribution of speakers is unequal, with the lowest percentages in the above‑35 age group, rising to 20% amongst the 16-24 age group. 
The 2011 census showed another small increase in the percentage of Basque speakers to 11.7% (63,000 speakers) 

==See also==

*Basque language
*Euskadi
*Kingdom of Navarre
*Kings of Navarre
*Lower Navarre
*Parliament of Navarre
*Nueva Navarra
*Renewable energy in the European Union

==References==

==External links==

*Official website (in Basque/English/French/Spanish)
*History of Navarre
*(LAS BARDENAS, CAVERN, GROTTE VALTIERRA, CUEVAS DE VALTIERRA)
*Bardenas Reales desert (Navarra)
*Northern Spanish region leads way on renewable energy
*
* Euskara Kultur Elkargoa-Basque Cultural Foundation
*Guide to the Navarra Pyrenees mountains.

 


