[[New Objectivity]]

Made in Germany (), by George Grosz, drawn in pen 1919, photo-lithograph published 1920 in the portfolio God with us (). Sheet 48.3 × 39.1 cm. In the collection of the MOMA
The New Objectivity (in ) is a term used to characterize the attitude of public life in Weimar Germany as well as the art, literature, music, and architecture created to adapt to it. Rather than some goal of philosophical objectivity, it was meant to imply a turn towards practical engagement with the world—an all-business attitude, understood by Germans as intrinsically American: "The Neue Sachlichkeit is Americanism, cult of the objective, the hard fact, the predilection for functional work, professional conscientiousness, and usefulness." Crockett p.1 

The term was originally the title of an art exhibition staged by Gustav Friedrich Hartlaub, the director of the in Mannheim, to showcase artists who were working in a post-expressionist spirit, but it took a life of its own, going beyond Hartlaub's intentions. As these artists rejected the self-involvement and romantic longings of the expressionists, Weimar intellectuals in general made a call to arms for public collaboration, engagement, and rejection of romantic idealism.

The movement essentially ended in 1933 with the fall of the Weimar Republic and the rise of the Nazis to power.

==Meaning==

Although 'New Objectivity' has been the most common translation of 'Neue Sachlichkeit', other translations have included 'New Matter-of-factness', 'New Resignation', 'New Sobriety,' and 'New Dispassion'. An introductory note by author Dennis Crockett in German post-expressionism explains that there is no direct English translation, and breaks down the meaning in the original German:

In particular, Crockett argues against the view implied by the translation of 'New Resignation', which he says is a popular misunderstanding of the attitude it describes. The idea that it conveys 'resignation' comes from the notion that the age of great socialist revolutions was over and that the left-leaning intellectuals who were living in Germany at the time wanted to adapt themselves to the social order represented in the Weimar Republic. Crockett tries to ground the word to its original meaning as intended by Hartlaub, and points out that the art of the Neue Sachlichkeit was meant to be more forward in political action than the modes of Expressionism it was turning against.

==Background==

Leading up to World War II, much of the art world was under the influence of Futurism and Expressionism, both of which abandoned any sense of order or commitment to objectivity or tradition. Expressionism was in particular the dominant form of art in Germany, and it was represented in many different facets of public life—in dance, in theater, in painting, in architecture, in poetry, and in literature.

Expressionists abandoned nature and sought to express emotional experience, often centering their art around inner turmoil (angst), whether in reaction to the modern world, to alienation from society, or in the creation of personal identity. In concert with this evocation of angst and unease with bourgeois life, expressionists also echoed some of the same feelings of revolution as did Futurists. This is evidenced by a 1919 anthology of expressionist poetry titled Menschheitsdämmerung, which translates to “Dawn of Humanity”—meant to suggest that humanity was in a 'twilight'; that there was an imminent demise of some old way of being and beneath it the urgings of a new dawning. Midgley 2000, p.15 

Critics of expressionism came from many circles. From the left, a strong critique began with Dadaism. The early exponents of Dada had been drawn together in Switzerland, a neutral country in the war, and seeing their common cause, wanted to use their art as a form of moral and cultural protest—they saw shaking off the constraints of artistic language in the same way they saw their refusal of national boundaries. They wanted to use their art in order to express political outrage and encourage political action. Expressionism, to Dadaists, expressed all of the angst and anxieties of society, but was helpless to do anything about it.

Bertolt Brecht, a German dramatist, launched another early critique of expressionism, referring to it as constrained and superficial. Just like in politics Germany had a new parliament but lacked parliamentarians, he argued, in literature there was an expression of delight in ideas, but no new ideas, and in theater a 'will to drama', but no real drama. His early plays, Baal and Trommeln in der Nacht (Drums in the Night) express repudations of fashionable interest in Expressionism.

After the destruction of the war, more conservative critics gained force particularly in their critique of the style of expressionism. This was exhibited particularly in Italy in a call for a return to order, but also had influence within Germany.

==Pictorial art==

===Verists and classicists===
Hartlaub first used the term in 1923 in a letter he sent to colleagues describing an exhibition he was planning. Roh et al. 1997, p. 285 In his subsequent article, "Introduction to 'New Objectivity': German Painting since Expressionism," Hartlaub explained, 

The Eclipse of the Sun by George Grosz, 1926
The New Objectivity comprised two tendencies which Hartlaub characterized in terms of a left and right wing: on the left were the verists, who "tear the objective form of the world of contemporary facts and represent current experience in its tempo and fevered temperature;" and on the right the classicists, who "search more for the object of timeless ability to embody the external laws of existence in the artistic sphere." 

The verists' vehement form of realism emphasized the ugly and sordid. Michalsky 1994, p. 20 Their art was raw, provocative, and harshly satirical. George Grosz and Otto Dix are considered the most important of the verists. Michalsky 1994, p. 27 The verists developed Dada's abandonment of any pictoral rules or artistic language into a “satirical hyperrealism”, as termed by Raoul Hausmann, and of which the best known examples are the graphical works and photo-montages of John Heartfield. Use of collage in these works became a compositional principle to blend reality and art, as if to suggest that to record the facts of reality was to go beyond the most simple appearances of things. This later developed into portraits and scenes by artists such as Grosz, Dix, and Rudolf Schlichter. Portraits would give emphasis to particular features or objects that were seen as distinctive aspects of the person depicted. Satirical scenes often depicted a madness behind what was happening, depicting the participants as cartoon-like. 

Other verists, like Christian Schad, depicted reality with a clinical precision, which suggested both an empirical detachment and intimate knowledge of the subject. Schad's paintings are characterized "an artistic perception so sharp that it seems to cut beneath the skin", according to the art critic Wieland Schmied. Schmied 1978, p.19 Often, psychological elements were introduced in his work, which suggested an underlying unconscious reality.

Max Beckmann, who is sometimes called an expressionist although he never considered himself part of any movement, Schmied 1978, pp. 23–24 was considered by Hartlaub to be a verist Schmied 1978, p. 10 and the most important artist of Neue Sachlichkeit. Michalsky 1994, p. 147 

Compared to the verists, the classicists more clearly exemplify the "return to order" that arose in the arts throughout Europe. The classicists included Georg Schrimpf, Alexander Kanoldt, Carlo Mense, Heinrich Maria Davringhausen, and Wilhelm Heise. The sources of their art include 19th-century art, the Italian metaphysical painters, the artists of Novecento Italiano, and Henri Rousseau. Schmied 1978, p. 11 

The classicists are best understood by Franz Roh's term Magic Realism, though Roh originally intended "magical realism" to be synonymous with the Neue Sachlichkeit as a whole. Schmied 1978, p. 9 For Roh, as a reaction to expressionism, the idea was declare “ the autonomy of the objective world around us was once more to be enjoyed; the wonder of matter that could crystallize into objects was to be seen anew.” Zamora and Faris 1995 With the term, he was emphasizing the “magic” of the normal world as it presents itself to us—how, when we really look at everyday objects, they can appear strange and fantastic.

===Regional groups===
Most of the artists of the New Objectivity did not travel widely, and stylistic tendencies were related to geography. While the classicists were based mostly in Munich, the verists worked mainly in Berlin (Grosz, Dix, Schlichter, and Schad); Dresden (Dix, Hans Grundig, Wilhelm Lachnit and others); and Karlsruhe (Karl Hubbuch, Georg Scholz, and Wilhelm Schnarrenberger). In Cologne, a constructivist group was led by Franz Wilhelm Seiwert and Heinrich Hoerle. Also from Cologne was Anton Räderscheidt, who after a brief constructivist phase became influenced by Antonio Donghi and the metaphysical artists. 

Franz Radziwill, who painted ominous landscapes, lived in relative isolation in a small coastal town. Michalski 1994, p. 153 Carl Grossberg became a painter after studying architecture in Aachen and Darmstadt and is noted for his clinical rendering of industrial technology. Michalski 1994, p. 169 

===Photography===
Albert Renger-Patzsch and August Sander are leading representatives of the "New Photography" movement, which brought a sharply focused, documentary quality to the photographic art where previously the self-consciously poetic had held sway. Michalski 1994, pp. 181, 188 Some other related projects as Neues Sehen, coexisted at the same moment. Karl Blossfeldt's plant photography is also often described as being a variation on New Objectivity. 

==Architecture==
Panorama of the IG Farben Building from the south, demonstrating how the curved shape of the building's façade reduces the impact of its scale.

New Objectivity in architecture, as in painting and literature, describes German work of the transitional years of the early 1920s in the Weimar culture, as a direct reaction to the stylistic excesses of Expressionist architecture and the change in the national mood. Architects such as Bruno Taut, Erich Mendelsohn and Hans Poelzig turned to New Objectivity's straightforward, functionally minded, matter-of-fact approach to construction, which became known in Germany as ("New Building"). The movement, flourishing in the brief period between the adoption of the Dawes plan and the rise of the Nazis, encompassed public exhibitions like the Weissenhof Estate, the massive urban planning and public housing projects of Taut and Ernst May, and the influential experiments at the Bauhaus.

== Film == 

In film, New Objectivity reached its high point around 1929. As a cinematic style, it translated into realistic settings, straightforward camerawork and editing, a tendency to examine inanimate objects as a way to interpret characters and events, a lack of overt emotionalism, and social themes. 

The director most associated with the movement is Georg Wilhelm Pabst. Pabst's films of the 1920s concentrate on social problems such as abortion, prostitution, labor disputes, homosexuality, and addiction. His cool and critical 1925 Joyless Street is a landmark of the objective style. Other directors included Ernő Metzner, Berthold Viertel, and Gerhard Lamprecht.

==Theater==
Bertolt Brecht, from his opposition to the focus on the individual in expressionist art, began a collaborative method to play production, starting with his Man Equals Man project. Midgley 2000, p.16 This approach to theater-craft began to be known as 'Brechtian', and the collective of writers and actors who he worked with are known as the 'Brechtian collective'.

==Music==
New Objectivity in music, as in the visual arts, rejected the sentimentality of late Romanticism and the emotional agitation of expressionism. Composer Paul Hindemith may be considered both a New Objectivist and an expressionist, depending on the composition, throughout the 1920s; for example, his wind quintet Op. 24 No. 2 (1922) designed as , or one may compare his operas Sancta Susanna (part of a fairly expressionist trilogy) and (a parody of modern life). Albright 2004, 278 His music typically harkens back to baroque models and makes use of traditional forms and stable polyphonic structures, together with modern dissonance and jazz-inflected rhythms. Ernst Toch and Kurt Weill also composed New Objectivist music during the 1920s. Though known late in life for his austere interpretations of the classics, in earlier years, conductor Otto Klemperer was the most prominent to ally himself with this movement.

==Legacy==
The New Objectivity movement is usually considered to have ended at the fall of the Weimar Republic when the National Socialists under Adolf Hitler seized power in January 1933. Schmied 1978, p. 30 The Nazi authorities condemned much of the work of the New Objectivity as "degenerate art", so that works were seized and destroyed and many artists were forbidden to exhibit. A few, including Karl Hubbuch, Adolf Uzarski, and Otto Nagel, were among the artists entirely forbidden to paint. While some of the major figures of the movement went into exile, they did not carry on painting in the same manner. George Grosz emigrated to America and adopted a romantic style, and Max Beckmann's work by the time he left Germany in 1937 was, by Franz Roh's definitions, expressionism. 

The influence of New Objectivity outside of Germany can be seen in the work of artists like Balthus, Salvador Dalí (in such early works as his Portrait of Luis Buñuel of 1924), Roh et al. 1997, p. 291 Auguste Herbin, Maruja Mallo, Cagnaccio di San Pietro, Grant Wood, Adamson-Eric, and Juhan Muks.

==Notes==

==References==

*Albright, Daniel, ed. (2004). Modernism and Music: an anthology of sources. Chicago: University of Chicago Press ISBN 0-226-01267-0
*Becker, Sabina (2000). Neue Sachlichkeit. Köln: Böhlau. Print.
*Crockett, Dennis (1999). German Post-Expressionism: the art of the Great Disorder 1918-1924". University Park, Pa.: Pennsylvania State University Press
*Grüttemeier, Ralf; Beekman, Klaus; Rebel, Ben, eds. (2013). Neue Sachlichkeit and Avant-Garde. Avant-Garde Critical Studies 29. Amsterdam / New York: Rodopi.
*Kaes, Anton; Jay, Martin; Dimendberg, Edward, eds (1994). The Weimar Republic Sourcebook. Berkeley: University of California Press.
*Lethen, Helmut (1970). Neue Sachlichkeit 1924-1932: Studien zur Literatur des "Weissen Sozialismus." Stuttgart: Metzler.
*Lindner, Martin (1994). Leben in der Krise. Zeitromane der neuen Sachlichkeit und die intellektuelle Mentalität der klassischen Moderne. Stuttgart: Metzler.
*Michalski, Sergiusz (1994). New Objectivity. Cologne: Benedikt Taschen. ISBN 3-8228-9650-0
* 
*Roh, Franz, Juan Manuel Bonet, Miguel Blesa De La Parra, and Martin Chirino (1997). Realismo mágico: Franz Roh y la pintura europea 1917-1936 : Ivam Centre Julio Gonzalez, , 19 junio - 31 agosto 1997 : Fundación Caja de Madrid, Madrid, 17 septiembre - 9 noviembre 1997 : Centro Atlantico de Arte Moderno, Canaria, 2 diciembre 1997 - 1 febrero 1998. Valencia: Ivam, Institut Valencià d'Art Modern. (Spanish and English)
*Schmied, Wieland (1978). Neue Sachlichkeit and German Realism of the Twenties. London: Arts Council of Great Britain. ISBN 0-7287-0184-7
*Willett, John (1978). The New Sobriety: art and politics in the Weimar Period, 1917-1933. London: Thames & Hudson (Reissued by Da Capo Press, New York, 1996 as "Art and Politics in the Weimar Period" ISBN 0-306-80724-6)
*Zamora, Lois Parkinson and Faris, Wendy B., eds. (1995). Magical Realism: Theory, History, Community. Durham and London: Duke University Press.

==External links==
*Fritz Schmalenbach essay
*Tate modern definition
*Neue Sachlichkeit (New Objectivity) Image Library
*Chaos and Classicism: Art in France, Italy, and Germany, 1918–1936. The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum. October 1, 2010–January 9, 2011.
*Table of Contents book Neue Sachlichkeit and Avant-Garde. Amsterdam / New York 2013. Rodopi


