[[Papal infallibility]]

Pope Pius IX (1846–1878), during whose pontificate the doctrine of papal infallibility was dogmatically defined by the First Vatican Council.

Papal infallibility is a dogma of the Catholic Church that states that, in virtue of the promise of Jesus to Peter, the Pope is preserved from the possibility of error "Infallibility means more than exemption from actual error; it means exemption from the possibility of error," P. J. Toner, Infallibility, Catholic Encyclopedia, 1910 "When, in the exercise of his office as shepherd and teacher of all Christians, in virtue of his supreme apostolic authority, he defines a doctrine concerning faith or morals to be held by the whole Church." 

This doctrine was defined dogmatically in the First Vatican Council of 1869–1870, but had been defended before that, existing already in medieval theology and being the majority opinion at the time of the Counter-Reformation. Brian Gogan, The Common Corps of Christendom (Brill 1982 ISBN 978-9-00406508-6), p. 33 

According to Catholic theology, there are several concepts important to the understanding of infallible, divine revelation: Sacred Scripture, Sacred Tradition, and the Sacred Magisterium. The infallible teachings of the Pope are part of the Sacred Magisterium, which also consists of ecumenical councils and the "...ordinary and universal magisterium." In Catholic theology, papal infallibility is one of the channels of the infallibility of the Church. The infallible teachings of the Pope must be based on, or at least not contradict, Sacred Tradition or Sacred Scripture.

The doctrine of infallibility relies on one of the cornerstones of Catholic dogma: that of petrine supremacy of the pope, and his authority as the ruling agent who decides what is accepted as formal beliefs in the Roman Catholic Church. Erwin Fahlbusch et al. The encyclopedia of Christianity Eradman Books ISBN 0-8028-2416-1 The clearest example (though not the only one) As solemn canonization is considered a valid use of infallibility and has been used many times by popes. Cf. Catholic Encyclopedia article on Beatification and Canonization of the use of this power, referred to as speaking ex cathedra Wilhelm, Joseph and Thomas Scannell. Manual of Catholic Theology. Volume 1, Part 1. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co. Ltd. 1906. pp 94–100 expressed since the solemn declaration of papal infallibility by Vatican I on July 18, 1870, took place in 1950 when Pope Pius XII defined the Assumption of Mary as being an article of faith for Roman Catholics. Encyclopedia of Catholicism by Frank K. Flinn, J. Gordon Melton 207 ISBN 0-8160-5455-X page 267 Catholics consider this authority apostolic, and of divine origin. Prior to the solemn definition of 1870, there were other ex cathedra decrees, for example, Pope Boniface VIII in the Bull Unam Sanctam of 1302, "We declare, say, define, and pronounce that it is absolutely necessary for the salvation of every human creature to be subject to the Roman Pontiff." Manning, Henry Cardinal. Vatican Decrees in their Bearing on Civil Allegiance. London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1875. pg 57, et. seq.: "But it is also true that these relations have been declared by the Church in acts and decrees of infallible authority. Such, for instance, is the bull of Boniface VIII., Unam Sanctam. As this has become the text and centre of the whole controversy at this moment, we will fully treat of it. This bull, then, was beyond all doubt an act ex cathedra... Whatever definition, therefore, is to be found in this bull is to be received as of faith." Fisher, George Parker. History of Christian Doctrine. Edinburgh: T&T Clark. 1896. page 543 and Pope Pius IX in the Papal constitution Ineffabilis Deus of 1854 "We declare, pronounce, and define that the doctrine which holds that the most Blessed Virgin Mary, in the first instance of her conception, by a singular grace and privilege granted by Almighty God, in view of the merits of Jesus Christ, the Savior of the human race, was preserved free from all stain of original sin, is a doctrine revealed by God and therefore to be believed firmly and constantly by all the faithful." MacArthur, John F., Jr. Charismatic Chaos. Grand Rapids: Zondervan. 1992. page 90 and Pope Eugene IV in the bull Cantate Domino of 1441, spoke ex cathedra.

== Conditions for teachings being declared infallible ==

Statements by a pope that exercise papal infallibility are referred to as solemn papal definitions or ex cathedra teachings. Also considered infallible are the teachings of the whole body of bishops of the Church, especially but not only in an ecumenical council Catechism of the Catholic Church, 891 (see Infallibility of the Church).

According to the teaching of the First Vatican Council and Catholic tradition, the conditions required for ex cathedra papal teaching are as follows:

# "the Roman Pontiff"
# "speaks ex cathedra" ("that is, when in the discharge of his office as shepherd and teacher of all Christians, and by virtue of his supreme apostolic authority....")
# "he defines"
# "that a doctrine concerning faith or morals"
# "must be held by the whole Church" (Pastor Aeternus, chap. 4) Cf. Exploring Doctrine: Papal Infallibility; Ronald J. Conte Jr, "Papal Infallibility and the Canonization of Saints" 

For a teaching by a pope or ecumenical council to be recognized as infallible, the teaching must be:
* A decision of the supreme teaching authority of the Church (pope or College of Bishops)
*Concern a doctrine of faith or morals
*Bind the universal Church
*Be proposed as something to hold firmly and immutably
The terminology of a definitive decree usually makes clear that this last condition is fulfilled, as through a formula such as "By the authority of Our Lord Jesus Christ and of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and by Our own authority, We declare, pronounce and define the doctrine . . . to be revealed by God and as such to be firmly and immutably held by all the faithful," or through an accompanying anathema stating that anyone who deliberately dissents is outside the Catholic Church. John Harty "Theological Definition" in The Catholic Encyclopedia 1908 

For example, in 1950, with Munificentissimus Deus, Pope Pius XII's infallible definition regarding the Assumption of Mary, there are attached these words:

In July 2005 Pope Benedict XVI stated during an impromptu address to priests in Aosta that: "The Pope is not an oracle; he is infallible in very rare situations, as we know." "Pope Has No Easy "Recipe" for Church Crisis." Zenit, 29 July 2005, retrieved 8 July 2009, zenit.org His predecessor Pope John XXIII once remarked: "I am only infallible if I speak infallibly but I shall never do that, so I am not infallible." John Wilkins, "The 'straight arrow' theologian and the pope" A doctrine proposed by a pope as his own opinion, not solemnly proclaimed as a doctrine of the Church, may be rejected as false, even if it is on a matter of faith and morals, and even more any view he expresses on other matters. A well-known example of a personal opinion on a matter of faith and morals that was taught by a pope but rejected by the Church is the view that Pope John XXII expressed on when the dead can reach the beatific vision. Cf. Hans Schwartz, Eschatology (Eerdmans 2000 ISBN 978-0-8028-4733-1), p. 298 The limitation on the pope's infallibility "on other matters" is frequently illustrated by Cardinal James Gibbons's recounting how the pope mistakenly called him Jibbons. The Journal of Ecclesiastical History 1952, vols. 3–4 Commonweal, vol. 57, p. 405 William V. Shannon, The American Irish (University of Massachusetts Press 1989 ISBN 978-0-87023-689-1), p. 120 Leslie Allen, Liberty (Simon & Schuster 1985), p. 236 Ashley Horace Thorndike, Modern Eloquence (New York 1928), p. 2 

Catholic theologians in general hold that the canonization of a saint by a pope is infallible teaching that the person canonized is definitely in heaven with God. A decree of canonization commands that the person be venerated by the whole Church as a saint, while beatification merely permits it. Camillo Beccari, "Beatification and Canonization" in Catholic Encyclopedia (New York 1907) Edward McNamara, "Canonizations and Infallibility" (ZENIT 23 August 2011) 

== Ex cathedra ==
The only ex cathedra application of papal infallibility since its solemn declaration has been for the Marian Dogma of Assumption in 1950. This painting of the Assumption is by Rubens, 1626

"Cathedra" and "sedes" are Latin words for a chair, the symbol of the teacher in the ancient world: we still refer metaphorically to the "chair" as the office of a university professor, and to the "see" of a bishop (from "sedes"). The pope is said to occupy the "chair of Peter" or the "Holy See," since Catholics hold that, as among the apostles Peter had a special role as the preserver of unity, so the pope as successor of Peter holds the role of spokesman for the whole church among the bishops, the successors of the apostles. 

In connection with papal infallibility, the Latin phrase ex cathedra (literally, "from the chair") has been defined as meaning "when, in the exercise of his office as shepherd and teacher of all Christians, in virtue of his supreme apostolic authority, (the Bishop of Rome) defines a doctrine concerning faith or morals to be held by the whole Church." First Vatican Council, First Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, chapter 4, 9 

The response demanded from believers has been characterized as "assent" in the case of ex cathedra declarations of the popes and "due respect" with regard to their other declarations. Christopher C. Butler, "Christian Teaching Authority and the Christian's Response" 

== Scripture and primacy of Peter ==

On the basis of , , and , the Catechism of the Catholic Church describes Peter as holding first place among the apostles. It speaks of Peter as the rock on which, because of Peter's faith, Christ said in he would build his Church, which he declared would be victorious over the powers of death. In , Jesus gave Peter the mission to keep his faith after every lapse and to strengthen his brothers in it. The Catechism of the Catholic Church sees the power of the keys that Jesus promised to Peter alone in as signifying authority to govern the house of God, that is, the Church, an authority that Jesus after his resurrection confirmed for Peter by instructing him in to feed Christ's sheep. The power to bind and loose, conferred on all the apostles jointly and to Peter in particular (Matthew 16:19) is seen in the Catechism of the Catholic Church as authority to absolve sins, to pronounce judgments on doctrine and to make decisions on Church discipline. Catechism of the Catholic Church, 552–553 

== Primacy of the Roman pontiff ==

Supporters of the pope outside the United Nations in 2008 with a banner quoting Matthew 16

Doctrine-based religions evolve their theologies over time, and Catholicism is no exception: its theology did not spring instantly and fully formed within the bosom of the earliest Church.

Pope St. Clement of Rome, c. 99, stated in a letter to the Corinthians: "Indeed you will give joy and gladness to us, if having become obedient to what we have written through the Holy Spirit, you will cut out the unlawful application of your zeal according to the exhortation which we have made in this epistle concerning peace and union." (Denziger §41, emphasis added)

St. Clement of Alexandria wrote on the primacy of Peter c. 200: "...the blessed Peter, the chosen, the pre-eminent, the first among the disciples, for whom alone with Himself the Savior paid the tribute..." (Jurgens §436).

The existence of an ecclesiastical hierarchy is emphasized by St. Stephan I, 251, in a letter to the bishop of Antioch: "Therefore did not that famous defender of the Gospel know that there ought to be one bishop in the Catholic Church the city of Rome? It did not lie hidden from him..." (Denziger §45).

St. Julius I, in 341 wrote to the Antiochenes: "Or do you not know that it is the custom to write to us first, and that here what is just is decided?" (Denziger §57a, emphasis added).

Catholicism holds that an understanding among the apostles was written down in what became the scriptures, and rapidly became the living custom of the Church, and that from there, a clearer theology could unfold.

St. Siricius wrote to Himerius in 385: "To your inquiry we do not deny a legal reply, because we, upon whom greater zeal for the Christian religion is incumbent than upon the whole body, out of consideration for our office do not have the liberty to dissimulate, nor to remain silent. We carry the weight of all who are burdened; nay rather the blessed apostle PETER bears these in us, who, as we trust, protects us in all matters of his administration, and guards his heirs" (Denziger §87, emphasis in original).

Many of the Church Fathers spoke of ecumenical councils and the Bishop of Rome as possessing a reliable authority to teach the content of scripture and tradition, albeit without a divine guarantee of protection from error.

== Theological history ==
Pope Leo XIII, as Bishop of Rome and successor of the Apostle Peter, represented as guiding the ship of God's Church (painting by Friedrich Stummel in Kevelaer Shrine 1903). Die katholischen Missionen, September 1903 

Klaus Schatz asserts that "it is impossible to fix a single author or era as the starting point" for the doctrine of papal infallibility. Others such as Brian Tierney have argued that the doctrine of papal infallibility was first proposed by Peter Olivi in the Middle Ages. Schatz and others see the roots of the doctrine as going much further back to the early days of Christianity.

Brian Tierney argued that the 13th-century Franciscan priest Peter Olivi was the first person to attribute infallibility to the pope. Origins of Papal Infallibility, 1150–1350 (E J Brill; Leiden, Netherlands 1972), p. 93 His idea was accepted by August Bernhard Hasler, and by Gregory Lee Jackson, Gregory Lee Jackson, Catholic, Lutheran, Protestant (Self-published 2007 ISBN 978-0-615-16635–3), p. 185 It was rejected by James Heft, "Heft disagrees with Tierney's thesis that the roots of papal infallibility extend only to Olivi" (John V. Kruse, "Reevaluating The Origins of Papal Infallibility" (Saint Louis University 2005), p. 2) and by John V. Kruse. Kruse's conclusions on the basis of papal bulls of the time give uncertain results about the existence in them of the notion of papal infallibility (Abstract of John V. Kruse, "Reevaluating The Origins of Papal Infallibility" (Saint Louis University 2005) Klaus Schatz says Olivi by no means played the key role assigned to him by Tierney, who failed to acknowledge the work of earlier canonists and theologians, and that the crucial advance in the teaching came only in the 15th century, two centuries after Olivi; and he declares that, "It is impossible to fix a single author or era as the starting point." Klaus Schatz, Papal Primacy (Liturgical Press, Collegeville, Minnesota 1996 ISBN 978-0-8146-5522-1) pp. 117–118 Ulrich Horst criticized the Tierney view for the same reasons. Unfehlbarkeit und Geschichte (Mainz 1982 ISBN 3-7867-0984-X), pp. 219 ff.) In his Protestant evaluation of the ecumenical issue of papal infallibility, Mark E. Powell rejects Tierney's theory about 13th-century Olivi, saying that the doctrine of papal infallibility defined at Vatican I had its origins in the 14th century—he refers in particular to Bishop Guido Terreni—and was itself part of a long development of papal claims. Mark E. Powell, Papal Infallibility (Eerdmans 2009 ISBN 978-0-8028-6284-6), p. 34 

Schatz points to "...the special esteem given to the Roman church community was always associated with fidelity in the faith and preservation of the paradosis (the faith as handed down)." Schatz differentiates between the later doctrine of "infallibility of the papal magisterium" and the Hormisdas formula in 519, which asserted that, "The Roman church has never erred (and will never err)." He emphasizes that Hormisdas formula was not meant to apply so much to, "...individual dogmatic definitions but to the whole of the faith as handed down and the tradition of Peter preserved intact by the Roman Church." Specifically, Schatz argues that the Hormisdas formula does not exclude the possibility of individual popes become heretics because the formula refers "...primarily to the Roman tradition as such and not exclusively to the person of the pope." 

=== Ecumenical councils ===

The 12th-century Decretum Gratiani contained the declaration by Pope Gregory I (590–604) that the first four ecumenical councils were to be revered "...like the four gospels," because they had been "established by universal consent," and also Gratian's assertion that, "The holy Roman Church imparts authority to the sacred canons but is not bound by them." Commentators on the Decretum, known as the Decretists, generally concluded that a pope could change the disciplinary decrees of the ecumenical councils but was bound by their pronouncements on articles of faith, in which field the authority of a general council was higher than that of an individual pope. Unlike those who propounded the 15th-century conciliarist theories, they understood an ecumenical council as necessarily involving the pope, and meant that the pope plus the other bishops was greater than a pope acting alone. 

=== Middle Ages ===

Several medieval theologians discussed the infallibility of the pope when defining matters of faith and morals, including Thomas Aquinas.

The Dictatus papae have been attributed to Pope Gregory VII (1073–1085) in the year 1075, but some have argued that they are later than 1087. Dictatus Papae 1090; cf. Miller, M. C., (2005), Power and the Holy in the Age of the Investiture Conflict: A Brief History with Documents, (Bedford; New York), pp. 81–83. They assert that no one can judge the pope (Proposition 19) and that "the Roman church has never erred; nor will it err to all eternity, the Scripture bearing witness" (Proposition 22). This is seen as a further step in advancing the idea that "...had been part of church history and debate as far back as 519 when the notion of the Bishop of Rome as the preserver of apostolic truth was set forth in the Formula of Hormisdas." "Papal infallibility" by Peter Stanford 

In the early years of the 14th century, the Franciscan Order found itself in open conflict about the form of poverty to observe, with the Spirituals (so called because associated with the Age of the Spirit that Joachim of Fiore had said would begin in 1260) History of the Franciscan Movement (3) pitched against the Conventual Franciscans. Tierney, p. 172 Brooke, The Image of St Francis, p. 100 The Spirituals, who in the 13th century were led by the Joachimist Peter Olivi, adopted extremist positions that eventually discredited the notion of apostolic poverty and led to its condemnation by Pope John XXII. Philip D. Krey et al., Nicholas of Lyra: The Senses of Scripture (Brill 2000 ISBN 978-90-04-11295-7), p. 240. This pope determined to suppress what he considered to be the excesses of the Spirituals, who contended eagerly for the view that Christ and his apostles had possessed absolutely nothing, either separately or jointly. In March 1322, he commissioned experts to examine the idea of poverty based on belief that Christ and the apostles owned nothing. The experts disagreed among themselves, but the majority condemned the idea on the grounds that it would condemn the Church's right to have possessions. The Franciscan chapter held in Perugia in May 1322 declared on the contrary: "To say or assert that Christ, in showing the way of perfection, and the Apostles, in following that way and setting an example to others who wished to lead the perfect life, possessed nothing either severally or in common, either by right of ownership and dominium or by personal right, we corporately and unanimously declare to be not heretical, but true and catholic." One argument used by them was that John XXII's predecessors had declared the absolute poverty of Christ to be an article of faith and that therefore no pope could declare the contrary. Tierney, p. 178 Appeal was made in particular to the 14 August 1279 bull Exiit qui seminat, in which Pope Nicholas III stated that renunciation of ownership of all things "...both individually but also in common, for God's sake, is meritorious and holy; Christ, also, showing the way of perfection, taught it by word and confirmed it by example, and the first founders of the Church militant, as they had drawn it from the fountainhead itself, distributed it through the channels of their teaching and life to those wishing to live perfectly." English translation 1; cf. English translation 2 and another translation in Rosalind B. Brooke, The Image of St Francis (Cambridge University Press 2006 ISBN 978-0-521-78291-3), p. 98 Tierney, p. 70 

By the bull Ad conditorem canonum of 8 December of the same year, English translation John XXII, declaring it ridiculous to pretend that every scrap of food given to the friars and eaten by them belonged to the pope, forced them to accept ownership by ending the arrangement according to which all property given to the Franciscans was vested in the Holy See, which granted the friars the mere use of it. He thus demolished the fictitious structure that gave the appearance of absolute poverty to the life of the Franciscan friars, Brooke, pp. 100–101 a structure that "...absolved the Franciscans from the moral burden of legal ownership, and enabled them to practise apostolic poverty without the inconvenience of actual poverty." Frans van Liere in The Medieval Review 06.10.24 This document was concerned with disciplinary rather than doctrinal matters, but leaders of the Franciscans reacted with insistence on the irreformability of doctrinal papal decrees, with special reference to Exiit. Tierney, p. 179–181 A year later, John XXII issued the short 12 November 1323 bull Cum inter nonnullos, English translation 1; English translation 2 which declared "erroneous and heretical" the doctrine that Christ and his apostles had no possessions whatever. Christopher Kleinhenz, Medieval Italy: An Encyclopedia (Routledge 2003 ISBN 978-0-415-93930-0), vol. 1, p. 373 Tierney, p. 181 

The next year, the Pope responded to continued criticisms with the bull Quia quorundam of 10 November 1324, English translation 1 and English translation 2 He denied the major premise of an argument of his adversaries, "What the Roman pontiffs have once defined in faith and morals with the key of knowledge stands so immutably that it is not permitted to a successor to revoke it." 186 He declared that there was no contradiction between his own statements and those of his predecessors; that it could not be inferred from the words of the 1279 bull that Christ and the apostles had nothing: "indeed, it can be inferred rather that the Gospel life lived by Christ and the Apostles did not exclude some possessions in common, since living 'without property' does not require that those living thus should have nothing in common"; that there were many things in the Franciscan rule "...which Christ neither taught nor confirmed by his example," and that there was neither merit nor truth in pretending Christ and the apostles had no rights in law. Gordon Leff, Heresy in the Later Middle Ages (Manchester University Press ISBN 978-0-7190-5743-4), pp. 241–242 

In his book on the First Vatican Council, August Hasler wrote, "John XXII didn't want to hear about his own infallibility. He viewed it as an improper restriction of his rights as a sovereign, and in the bull Qui quorundam (1324) condemned the Franciscan doctrine of papal infallibility as the work of the devil." Hasler, A. B., (1981) How the Pope Became Infallible: Pius IX and the Politics of Persuasion (Doubleday; Garden City, NY),pp 36–37 

Brian Tierney has summed up his view of the part played by John XXII as follows:

In 1330, the Carmelite bishop Guido Terreni described the pope's charism of infallibility in terms very similar to those that the First Vatican Council was to use in 1870. Mark E. Powell, Papal Infallibility: A Protestant Evaluation of an Ecumenical Issue (Eerdmans 2009 ISBN 978-0-8028-6284-6), p. 34 

=== Post-Counter-Reformation ===
In the period following the Counter-Reformation the Dominican school of theology at the Roman College of Saint Thomas in Rome, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum was active in defending the doctrine of Papal infallibility. Vincentius Ferre (+1682), Regent of College of St. Thomas from 1654 to 1672. Remigius Coulon, Ferre: Vincent, in: Dictionary of Catholic Theology, ed. by A. Vacant, E. Mangenor and E. Amann, Vol 5/2, Paris 1913, 2176 -2177. writes in his De Fide in defense of Papal Infalibility that Christ said "I have prayed for thee, Peter; sufficiently showing that the infallibility was not promised to the Church as apart from (seorsum) the head, but promised to the head, that from him it should be derived to the Church." De Fide, quaest. xii, apud Rocaberti, tom. xx, p. 388, quoted in The Vatican Council and Its Definitions: Pastoral Letter to the Clergy, Henry Edward Manning (1871), 105. http://books.google.com/books?id=_MMPAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA105#v=onepage&q&f=false Accessed 2-17-2013. Ferre also writes:"The exposition of certain Paris (doctors) is of no avail, who affirm that Christ only promised that the faith should not fail of the Church founded upon Peter; and not that it should not fail in the successors of Peter taken apart from (seorsum) the Church" Dominic Gravina, professor of theology at the College of St. Thomas in Rome wrote concerning Papal infallibility: "To the Pontiff, as one (person) and alone, it was given to be te head," and again, "The Roman Pontiff for the time being is one, therefore he alone has infallibility." De supremo Judice controv. Fidei et de Papae Infallib. in Decret. Fidei, Morum, etc, quaest. 1, apud Rocaberti, Bibliotheca Maxima Pontificia, 1695-99, tom viii, 392. http://books.google.com/books?id=_MMPAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA105#v=onepage&q&f=false Vincenzo Maria Gatti, also a professor of theology at the College of st. Thomas defended papal infallibility says of Christ's words "I have prayed for thee," etc., that "indefectibity is promised to Peter apart from (seorsum) the Church, or from the Apostles; but it is not promised to the Apostles, or to the Church. apart (seorsum) the head, or with the head," adding "Therefore Peter, even apart from (seorsum) the Church, is infallible." Gatti, Institutiones Apologetico-Polemicae, apud Bianchi de Constitutione Monarchica Ecclesiae, 124, Rome 1870, quoted in The Vatican Council and Its Definitions: Pastoral Letter to the Clergy by Henry Edward Manning, http://books.google.com/books?id=_MMPAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA107#v=onepage&q&f=false Accessed 2-17-2013 

=== Dogmatic definition of 1870 ===

The infallibility of the pope was formally defined in 1870, although the tradition behind this view goes back much further. In the conclusion of the fourth chapter of its Dogmatic Constitution on the Church Pastor aeternus, the First Vatican Council declared the following, with bishops Aloisio Riccio and Edward Fitzgerald dissenting: 

According to Catholic theology, this is an infallible dogmatic definition by an ecumenical council. Because the 1870 definition is not seen by Catholics as a creation of the Church, but as the dogmatic revelation of a truth about the papal magisterium, papal teachings made prior to the 1870 proclamation can, if they meet the criteria set out in the dogmatic definition, be considered infallible. Ineffabilis Deus is an example of this.

A British Prime Minister, William Ewart Gladstone, publicly attacked Vatican I, stating that Roman Catholics had "...forfeited their moral and mental freedom." He published a pamphlet called The Vatican Decrees in their Bearing on Civil Allegiance in which he described the Catholic Church as "an Asian monarchy: nothing but one giddy height of despotism, and one dead level of religious subservience." He further claimed that the Pope wanted to destroy the rule of law and replace it with arbitrary tyranny, and then to hide these "...crimes against liberty beneath a suffocating cloud of incense." Philip Magnus, Gladstone: A Biography (London: John Murray, 1963), pp. 235–6. Cardinal Newman famously responded with his Letter to the Duke of Norfolk. In the letter he argues that conscience, which is supreme, is not in conflict with papal infallibility—though he toasts, "I shall drink to the Pope if you please—still, to conscience first and to the Pope afterwards." Letter to the Duke of Norfolk in The Genius of John Henry Newman: Selections from His Writings. Ed. I. Ker. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990. He stated later that, "The Vatican Council left the Pope just as it found him," satisfied that the definition was very moderate, and specific in regards to what specifically can be declared as infallible Stanley Jaki in Newman's Challenge p. 170 

=== Lumen Gentium ===

The dogmatic constitution Lumen Gentium of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, which was also a document on the Church itself, explicitly reaffirmed the definition of papal infallibility, so as to avoid any doubts, expressing this in the following words:

== Instances of infallible declarations ==

The Catholic Church does not teach that the pope is infallible in everything he says; official invocation of papal infallibility is – apart from canonizations of saints – extremely rare.

Catholic theologians agree that both Pope Pius IX's 1854 definition of the dogma of the Immaculate Conception of Mary and Pope Pius XII's 1950 definition of the dogma of the Assumption of Mary are instances of papal infallibility, a fact confirmed by the Church's magisterium. However, theologians disagree about what other documents qualify.

Regarding historical papal documents, Catholic theologian and church historian Klaus Schatz made a thorough study, published in 1985, that identified the following list of ex cathedra documents (see Creative Fidelity: Weighing and Interpreting Documents of the Magisterium, by Francis A. Sullivan, chapter 6):

# Tome to Flavian, Pope Leo I, 449, on the two natures in Christ, received by the Council of Chalcedon;
# Letter of Pope Agatho, 680, on the two wills of Christ, received by the Third Council of Constantinople;
# Benedictus Deus, Pope Benedict XII, 1336, on the beatific vision of the just after death rather than only just prior to final judgment; complete text of Benedictus Deus 
# Cum occasione, Pope Innocent X, 1653, condemning five propositions of Jansen as heretical;
# Auctorem fidei, Pope Pius VI, 1794, condemning seven Jansenist propositions of the Synod of Pistoia as heretical;
# Ineffabilis Deus, Pope Pius IX, 1854, defining the Immaculate Conception;
# Munificentissimus Deus, Pope Pius XII, 1950, defining the Assumption of Mary.

The Holy See has given no complete list of papal statements considered infallible. A 1998 commentary on Ad Tuendam Fidem issued by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith published on L'Osservatore Romano in July 1998 listed a number of instances of infallible pronouncements by popes and by ecumenical councils, but explicitly stated (at no. 11) that this was not meant to be a complete list.

One of the documents mentioned is Pope John Paul II's apostolic letter Ordinatio Sacerdotalis on reserving priestly ordination to men alone, which the Congregation earlier stated to be infallible, although not taught ex cathedra (i.e., although not a teaching of the extraordinary magisterium), clarifying that the content of this letter has been taught infallibly by the ordinary and universal magisterium. This was confirmed in a commentary by the same Congregation and in commentaries by Cardinals Joseph Ratzinger and Tarcisio Bertone. 

As well as popes, ecumenical councils have made pronouncements that the Church considers infallible.

== Denial by Catholics ==

Ideas of papal infallibility broader than that defined as dogma by the First Vatican Council have been explicitly denied even by popes. Thus the claim of infallibility advanced by Franciscan Spirituals in the 14th century, and that has been attributed also to 13th-century Peter Olivi, Jackson, G. L., (207) Catholic, Lutheran, Protestant: a doctrinal comparison of three Christian Confessionsp185. with regard to a statement by Pope Nicholas III was rejected by Pope John XXII. Tierney, B., (1972) Origins of Papal Infallibility 1150–1350 – A Study on the Concepts of Infallibility, Sovereignty, and Tradition in the Middle Ages (E J Brill; Leiden, Netherlands), p171 Thomas Turley, "Infallibilists in the Curia of Pope John XXII" Journal of Medieval History (April 1975), 1 (1), pp. 71–101 (Abstract) The terms in which John XXII condemned the position of the Franciscan Spirituals "...left a way open for later theologians to re-formulate the doctrine of infallibility in different language," as Guido Terreni, a member of Pope John XXII's court, did in 1330 in terms "closer to the nineteenth century doctrine of papal infallibility than any that had been developed earlier" Tierney, p. 250 and closely anticipating the doctrine of the First Vatican Council. 

Examples of Catholics who before the First Vatican Council disbelieved in papal infallibility are French abbé François-Philippe Mesenguy (1677–1763), who wrote a catechism denying the infallibility of the pope, and the German Felix Blau (1754–1798), who as professor at the University of Mainz criticized infallibility. Lehner and Printy, Companion 2010, p. 151 

In 1822, Bishop Baine declared: "In England and Ireland I do not believe that any Catholic maintains the Infallibility of the Pope." 

A 1989–1992 survey of young people of the 15 to 25 age group (81% of whom were Catholics, 84% were younger than 19, and 62% were male) chiefly from the United States, but also from Austria, Canada, Ecuador, France, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Peru, Spain and Switzerland, found that 36.9% affirmed that, "The Pope has the authority to speak with infallibility," 36.9% (exactly the same proportion) denied it, and 26.2% said they didn't know. Johann G. Roten, S.M, A Faceless Madonna: Young People Love the Blessed Mother But Do Not Know Her Very Well 

In addition, before 1870, belief in papal infallibility was not a defined requirement of Catholic faith. The Church therefore accepted the oath required of Catholics in Ireland from 1793 for admittance to certain positions and stated that, "It is not an article of the Catholic Faith, neither am I thereby required to believe or profess that the Pope is infallible." Gladstone, Vaticanism, p. 48, quoted in William John Sparrow-Simpson, Roman Catholic Opposition to Papal Infallibility (John Murray 1909), p. 101 The Irish bishops repeated their acceptance in a 25 January 1826 pastoral address to the Catholic clergy and laity in Ireland, stating: "The Catholics of Ireland not only do not believe, but they declare upon oath ... that it is not an article of the Catholic faith, neither are they required to believe, that the Pope is infallible, and that they do not hold themselves 'bound to obey any order in its own nature immoral', though the Pope or any ecclesiastical power should issue or direct such an order; but, on the contrary, that it would be sinful in them to pay any respect or obedience thereto." Catholic Spectator, Volume 4 (1826), p. 55; and The Dublin Review, Volume 2, December (1837) (William Spooner; London), p. 586 Gladstone, Vatican Decrees, vol. xliii, ed. 1875, quoted in Sparrow-Simpson, pp. 101–102 

In the Declaration and Protestation signed by the English Catholic Dissenters in 1789, the year of the French Revolution, Included in pp. 14–30 the signatories state: Paragraphs 7–8 of the document 

Sparrow-Simpson remarked that, "All works reprinted since 1870 have been altered into conformity with Vatican ideas. In some cases the process of reducing to conformity was begun at an earlier date. It is therefore with works printed before 1870 that we are now concerned." He therefore cites editions prior to that date. Sparrow-Simpson, p. 106 

In his theological works published in 1829, Professor Delahogue asserted that the doctrine that the Roman Pontiff, even when he speaks ex cathedra, is possessed of the gift of inerrancy or is superior to General Councils may be denied without loss of faith or risk of heresy or schism. Sparrow-Simpson, p. 107 

In his 1829 study On the Church, Delahogue stated: "Ultramontane theologians attribute infallibility to the Bishop of Rome considered in this aspect and when he speaks, as the saying is, ex cathedra. This is denied by others, in particular by Gallicans." "Romano pontifici sub hoc ultimo respectu considerato, et ubi loquitur, ut dicunt, ex cathedra, infallibilitatem attribuunt Ultramontani theologi, quibus alii, et Galli speciatim, contradicunt" G. Finch, The Romish Controversy (British Society for Promoting the Religious Principles of the Reformation, London 1850), vol. II, p. 846 

The 1830 edition of Berrington and Kirk's Faith of Catholics stated: "Papal definitions or decrees, in whatever form pronounced, taken exclusively from a General Council or acceptance of the Church, oblige no one under pain of heresy to an interior assent." 

The 1860 edition of Keenan's Catechism in use in Catholic schools in England, Scotland and Wales attributed to Protestants the idea that Catholics were obliged to believe in papal infallibility:

:(Q.) Must not Catholics believe the Pope himself to be infallible?
:(A.) This is a Protestant invention: it is no article of the Catholic faith: no decision of his can oblige under pain of heresy, unless it be received and enforced by the teaching body, that is by the bishops of the Church.

Sparrow-Simpson quotes also from the 1895 revision:

:(Q.) But some Catholics before the Vatican Council denied the Infallibility of the Pope, which was also formerly impugned in this very Catechism.
:(A.) Yes; but they did so under the usual reservation – 'in so far as they could then grasp the mind of the Church, and subject to her future definitions' ... Sparrow-Simpson, pp. 111–112 

In 1861, Professor Murray of the major Irish Catholic seminary of Maynooth wrote that those who genuinely deny the infallibility of the pope "are by no means or only in the least degree (unless indeed some other ground be shown) to be considered alien from the Catholic Faith." Sparrow-Simpson, pp. 115–116 

Critical works such as Roman Catholic Opposition to Papal Infallibility (1909) by W. J. Sparrow-Simpson have thus documented opposition to the definition of the dogma during the First Vatican Council even by those who believed in its teaching but felt that defining it was not opportune. W. J. Sparrow Simpson, Roman Catholic Opposition to Papal Infallibility (John Murray 1909) 

Following the 1869–1870 First Vatican Council, dissent arose among a few Catholics, almost exclusively German, Austrian, and Swiss, over the definition of papal infallibility. The dissenters, while holding the General Councils of the Church infallible, were unwilling to accept the dogma of papal infallibility, and thus a schism arose between them and the Church, resulting in the formation of communities in schism with Rome, which became known as the Old Catholic Churches. The vast majority of Catholics accepted the definition. 

Before the First Vatican Council, John Henry Newman, while personally convinced, as a matter of theological opinion, of papal infallibility, opposed its definition as dogma, fearing that the definition might be expressed in over-broad terms open to misunderstanding. He was pleased with the moderate tone of the actual definition, which "affirmed the pope's infallibility only within a strictly limited province: the doctrine of faith and morals initially given to the apostolic Church and handed down in Scripture and tradition." Avery Dulles, "Newman on Infallibility" in Theological Studies 51 (1990), p. 444 

A few present-day Catholics, such as Hans Küng, author of Infallible? An Inquiry, and historian Garry Wills, author of Papal Sin, refuse to accept papal infallibility as a matter of faith. Küng has been sanctioned by the Church by being excluded from teaching Catholic theology. Brian Tierney agrees with Küng, whom he cites, and concludes: "There is no convincing evidence that papal infallibility formed any part of the theological or canonical tradition of the church before the thirteenth century; the doctrine was invented in the first place by a few dissident Franciscans because it suited their convenience to invent it; eventually, but only after much initial reluctance, it was accepted by the papacy because it suited the convenience of the popes to accept it." Tierney, Origins of Papal Infallibility, 1150–1350 (Brill 1972), p. 281 Garth Hallett, "...drawing on a previous study of Wittgenstein's treatment of word meaning," argued that the dogma of infallibility is neither true nor false but meaningless; in practice, he claims, the dogma seems to have no practical use and to have succumbed to the sense that it is irrelevant. Darkness and Light: The Analysis of Doctrinal Statements (Paulist Press, 1975), and see Germain Grisez, "Note. Infallibility and Contraception: A Reply to Garth Hallett" in Theological Studies 47 (1986) 

Catholic priest August Bernhard Hasler (d. 3 July 1980) wrote a detailed analysis of the First Vatican Council, presenting the passage of the infallibility definition as orchestrated. Roger O'Toole described Hasler's work as follows: Roger O'Toole, Review of "How the Pope Became Infallible: Pius IX and the Politics of Persuasion" by August Bernhard
Hasler; Peter Heinegg, Sociological Analysis, Vol. 43, No. 1. (Spring, 1982), pp. 86–88, at p. 87. 

# It weakens or demolishes the claim that papal infallibility was already a universally accepted truth, and that its formal definition merely made de jure what had long been acknowledged de facto.
# It emphasizes the extent of resistance to the definition, particularly in France and Germany.
# It clarifies the 'inopportunist' position as largely a polite fiction and notes how it was used by Infallibilists to trivialize the nature of the opposition to papal claims.
# It indicates the extent to which 'spontaneous popular demand' for the definition was, in fact, carefully orchestrated.
# It underlines the personal involvement of the pope who, despite his coy disclaimers, appears as the prime mover and driving force behind the Infallibilist campaign.
# It details the lengths to which the papacy was prepared to go in wringing formal 'submissions' from the minority even after their defeat in the Council.
# It offers insight into the ideological basis of the dogma in European political conservatism, monarchism and counter-revolution.
# It establishes the doctrine as a key contributing element in the present 'crisis' of the Roman Catholic Church.

Mark E. Powell, in his examination of the topic from a Protestant point of view, writes: "August Hasler portrays Pius IX as an uneducated, abusive megalomaniac, and Vatican I as a council that was not free. Hasler, though, is engaged in heated polemic and obviously exaggerates his picture of Pius IX. Accounts like Hasler's, which paint Pius IX and Vatican I in the most negative terms, are adequately refuted by the testimony of participants at Vatican I." Infallibility: A Protestant Evaluation of an Ecumenical Issue, (ISBN 978-0-8028-6284-6 Published by William B Eerdmans Publishing Co), p. 23 

== Objections ==

Those opposed to papal infallibility such as Geisler and MacKenzie What Think Ye of Rome? Part Four: The Catholic-Protestant Debate on Papal Infallibility, Christian Research Journal, Fall 1994, page 24 say that it is contrary to Scripture and to the teaching of the early Church. 

* On linguistic grounds and their understanding that Peter's authority was shared, James Robert White James Robert White, Answers to Catholic Claims, 104–8; Crowne Publications, Southbridge, MA: 1990 and others say that does not refer to Peter as the Rock. They argue that in this passage Peter is in the second person ("you"), but that "this rock," being in the third person, refers to Christ, the subject of Peter's truth confession in verse 16, and the revelation referred to in verse 17, who is explicitly affirmed to be the foundation of the church. petra: Rm. 8:33; 1Cor. 10:4; 1Pet. 2:8; lithos: Mat. 21:42; Mk.12:10–11; Lk. 20:17–18; Act. 4:11; Rm. 9:33; Eph. 2:20; 1Pet. 2:4–8; cf. Dt. 32:4, Is. 28:16; speaks of the church as "built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets" White cites Catholic authorities such as John Chrysostom and St. Augustine of Hippo as supporting this understanding, with Augustine stating, "On this rock, therefore, He said, which thou hast confessed. I will build my Church. For the Rock (petra) is Christ; and on this foundation was Peter himself built." Augustine, On the Gospel of John Tractate 12435, The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers Series I, Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1983, 7:450, as cited in White, Answers to Catholic Claims, p. 106 
* They understand "keys" in the Matthean passage and its authority as primarily or exclusively pertaining to the gospel. John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, p. 1105; Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1960 
* They see the prayer of Jesus for Peter, that his faith fail not () as not promising infallibility to a papal office, which they hold to be a late and novel doctrine. 
* While recognizing Peter's significant role in the early church, and his initial brethren-type leadership, they contend that the Book of Acts manifests him as inferior to the apostle Paul in his level of contribution and influence, with Paul becoming the dominant focus in the Biblical records of the early church, and the writer of most of the New Testament (receiving direct revelation), and having authority to publicly reprove Peter.(Gal. 2:11–14)
* Geisler and MacKenzie also see the absence of any reference by Peter referring to himself distinctively, such as the chief of apostles, and instead only as "an apostle" or "an elder" (1Pet. 1:1; 5:1) as weighing against Peter being the supreme and infallible head of the church universal, and indicating he would not accept such titles as Holy Father.
* They say that the revelatory function connected to the office of the high priest Caiaphas, (Jn. 11:49–52) does not establish a precedent for Petrine infallibility, since (among other reasons) they infer from that there is no new revelation after the time of the New Testament, as held also by Catholics. 
* Likewise, they hold that no Jewish infallible magisterium existed, but the faith yet endured, and that the Roman Catholic doctrine on infallibility is a new invention. White, A Response to David Palm's Article on Oral Tradition from This Rock Magazine, May 1995 A Response to an Argument for Infallibility 
* They see the promise of papal infallibly as violated by certain popes who spoke heresy (as recognized, they say, by the Roman church itself) under conditions that, they argue, fit the criteria for infallibility. Richard Frederick Littledale, Plain reasons against joining the Church of Rome, pp. 157–59. E. J. V. Huiginn, From Rome to Protestantism, The Forum, Volume 5, p. 111 
* They say that at the Council of Jerusalem Peter was not looked to as the infallible head of the church, with James exercising the more decisive leadership, and providing the definitive sentence; F. F. Bruce, Peter, Stephen, James and John, 86ff; Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1979 and that he is not seen elsewhere as the final and universal arbiter about any doctrinal dispute about faith in the life of the church. Peter De Rosa, Vicars of Christ: the Dark Side of the Papacy 
* They hold as unwarranted on scriptural and historical grounds the idea that monarchical leadership by an infallible pope is needed or has existed; that the infallible authority is the scriptures rather than an infallible head. E.J.V. Huiginn, From Rome to Protestantism, The Forum, Volume 5, pp. 111–113 White, Of Athanasius and Infallibility and that church leadership in the New Testament is understood as being that of bishops and elders, denoting the same office, rather than an infallible pope. James White, A Response to an Argument for Infallibility White, Exegetica: Roman Catholic Apologists Practice Eisegesis in Scripture and Patristics (Titus 1:5–7)
* They argue further that the doctrine of papal infallibility lacked universal or widespread support in the bulk of church history, and that substantial opposition to it existed within the Catholic Church, even at the time of its official institution, saying that this testifies to its lack of scriptural and historical warrant. Harold O. J. Brown, Protest of a Troubled Protestant, New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House, 1969; p. 122 Williston Walker, A History of the Christian Church, 3d ed. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1970; p. 67 E.J.V. Huiginn, From Rome to Protestantism, The Forum, Volume 5, pp. 109–110 
* Chapter 7 of Lytton Strachey's biography of Cardinal Manning includes a discussion of papal infallability and some possible objections. http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Eminent_Victorians/Cardinal_Manning#VII 

== Positions of some other churches ==

=== Eastern Orthodoxy ===

The dogma of papal infallibility is rejected by Eastern Orthodoxy. Orthodox Christians hold that the Holy Spirit will not allow the whole Body of Orthodox Christians to fall into error Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs of 1848 but leave open the question of how this will be ensured in any specific case. Eastern Orthodoxy considers that the first seven ecumenical councils were infallible as accurate witnesses to the truth of the gospel, not so much on account of their institutional structure as on account of their reception by the Christian faithful.

Additionally, Orthodox Christians do not believe that any individual bishop is infallible or that the idea of papal infallibility was taught during the first centuries of Christianity. Orthodox historians often point to the condemnation of Pope Honorius I as a heretic by the Sixth Ecumenical council as a significant indication. However, it is debated whether Honorius' letter to Sergius met (in retrospect) the criteria set forth at Vatican I. Other Orthodox scholars Cleenewerck, Laurent. His Broken Body: Understanding and Healing the Schism between the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches. pp. 301–30 argue that past papal statements that appear to meet the conditions set forth at Vatican I for infallible status presented teachings in faith and morals are now acknowledged as problematic.

=== Anglican churches ===

The Church of England and its sister churches in the Anglican Communion reject papal infallibility, a rejection given expression in the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion (1571):

=== Methodism ===

John Wesley amended the Anglican Articles of Religion for use by Methodists, particularly those in America. The Methodist Articles omit the express provisions in the Anglican articles concerning the errors of the Church of Rome and the authority of councils, but retain Article V, which implicitly pertains to the Roman Catholic idea of papal authority as capable of defining articles of faith on matters not clearly derived from Scripture:

=== Reformed churches ===

Presbyterian and Reformed churches reject papal infallibility. The Westminster Confession of Faith, Reformed.org which was intended in 1646 to replace the Thirty-Nine Articles, goes so far as to label the Roman pontiff "Antichrist"; it contains the following statements:

=== Evangelical churches ===

Evangelical churches do not believe in papal infallibility for reasons similar to those of Methodist and Reformed Christians. Evangelicals believe that the Bible alone is infallible or inerrant. Most evangelical churches and ministries have statements of doctrine that explicitly say that the Bible, composed of the Hebrew Scriptures and the New Testament, is the sole rule for faith and practice. Most of these statements, however, are articles of faith that evangelicals affirm in a positive way, and contain no reference to the papacy or other beliefs that are not part of evangelical doctrine.

== Claim that Vatican I was to dogmatize papal temporal power ==

According to Raffaele De Cesare:

: The first idea of convening an Ecumenical Council in Rome to elevate the temporal power into a dogma, originated in the third centenary of the Council of Trent, which took place in that city in December, 1863, and was attended by a number of Austrian and Hungarian prelates. 

However, following the Austro-Prussian War, Austria had recognized the Kingdom of Italy. Consequently, because of this and other substantial political changes: "The Civiltà Cattolica suggested that the papal infallibility should be substituted for the dogma of temporal power..." 

Moritz Busch's Bismarck: Some secret pages of his history, Vol. II, Macmillan (1898) contains the following entry for 3 March 1872 in pp. 43–44.

== Bismarck's reaction ==

According to F.B.M. Hollyday, Chancellor Otto von Bismarck feared that Pius IX and future popes would use the infallibility dogma as a weapon for promoting a potential "papal desire for international political hegemony":

One example of the Catholic church's political actions, to add to the many that had occurred down the centuries, had already occurred in Italy on 29 February 1868, when the Sacred Penitentiary issued the decree Non Expedit, which declared that a Catholic should be "neither elector nor elected" in the Kingdom of Italy. Encyclopaedia Britannica: "non expedit The principal motive of this decree was that the oath taken by deputies might be interpreted as an approval of the spoliation of the Holy See, as Pius IX declared in an audience of 11 October 1874. Umberto Benigni, "Non Expedit" in Catholic Encyclopedia (New York 1911) Only in 1888 was the decree declared to be an absolute prohibition rather than an admonition meant for one particular occasion. Sapere.it: "non expedit" 

 in 1872 Bismarck attempted to reach an understanding with other European governments, whereby future papal elections would be manipulated. He proposed that European governments should agree beforehand on unsuitable papal candidates, and then instruct their national cardinals to vote in the appropriate manner. This plan was circulated in confidential diplomatic circular to German representatives abroad," Berlin, 14 May 1872, as translated in: F.B.M. Hollyday, Bismarck, (Great Lives Observed, Prentice-Hall (1970) pp. 42–44, in which Bismarck wrote:

==See also==

*John Dalberg-Acton, 1st Baron Acton
*Papal supremacy
*Primacy of the Roman Pontiff
*Sola scriptura
*Three-Chapter Controversy
*Union of Utrecht (Old Catholic)
*Ismah, a similar concept in Islam

== Footnotes ==

== Bibliography ==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* Translation of 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* http://ejournals.bc.edu/ojs/index.php/ctsa/article/view/2986/2600
* Bishop Joseph Fessler (1813–1872) , Secretary-General of the First Vatican Council. The true and the false infallibility of the Popes. (1871) 
* Catechism of the Catholic Church on infallibility (Holy See official website)
* 
* 
* 
* Catholicregister.org News article from the Catholic Register on Rethinking Papal Infallibilty.


