[[The Great Gatsby (2013 film)]]

The Great Gatsby is a 2013 Australian-American 3D drama film based on F. Scott Fitzgerald's 1925 novel of the same name. The film was co-written and directed by Baz Luhrmann, and stars Leonardo DiCaprio, Tobey Maguire, Carey Mulligan, Joel Edgerton, and Elizabeth Debicki. It follows the life and times of millionaire Jay Gatsby and his neighbor Nick, who recounts his encounter with Gatsby at the height of the Roaring Twenties. The film was originally going to be released on December 25, 2012, but moved to May 10, 2013 in 3D. While the film received mixed reviews from critics, audiences responded much more positively, http://www.thewrap.com/movies/article/cinemascore-gets-studios-especially-when-it-counters-critics-87701 and F. Scott Fitzgerald's family praised the film, claiming "Scott would have been proud". As of 2014, it is Baz Luhrmann's highest grossing film to date, earning over $350 million worldwide. http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=greatgatsby2012.htm At the 86th Academy Awards, it was nominated for Best Production Design and Best Costume Design, winning both.

==Plot==
In the winter of 1929, Nick Carraway (Tobey Maguire), a Yale University graduate and World War I veteran, is staying at a sanatorium to treat his alcoholism. He talks about Gatsby (Leonardo DiCaprio), describing him as the most hopeful man he had ever met. When he struggles to articulate his thoughts, his doctor, Walter Perkins (Jack Thompson), suggests writing it down, since writing is Nick's true passion.

In the summer of 1922, Nick moves from the U.S. Midwest to New York taking a job as bond salesman after abandoning writing. He rents a small house on Long Island in the (fictional) village of West Egg, next door a lavish mansion belonging to Jay Gatsby, a mysterious business magnate who often holds extravagant parties. One day, Nick drives across the bay to East Egg to have dinner with his cousin, Daisy Buchanan (Carey Mulligan), and her husband, Tom (Joel Edgerton), a college acquaintance of Nick's. They introduce Nick to Jordan Baker (Elizabeth Debicki), a cynical young golfer with whom Daisy wishes to couple Nick.

Jordan tells Nick that Tom has a mistress who lives in the "valley of ashes," an industrial dumping ground between West Egg and New York City. Not long after this revelation, Nick travels with Tom to the valley, where they stop by a garage owned by George Wilson (Jason Clarke) and his wife, Myrtle (Isla Fisher), who is Tom's lover that Jordan mentioned. Nick accompanies Tom and Myrtle to an apartment they keep for their affair. Myrtle throws a vulgar and bizarre party with her sister Catherine (Adelaide Clemens), that ends with Tom breaking Myrtle's nose as she taunts him about Daisy.

As the summer progresses, Nick receives an invitation to one of Gatsby's parties. Upon arriving, he learns that he is the only one who received an invitation, and that none of the guests have ever met Gatsby. There are multiple theories as to who he is: a German spy, a prince, even an assassin. Nick encounters Jordan, and they meet Gatsby, who is surprisingly young and rather aloof. Gatsby's butler later informs Jordan that Gatsby wishes to speak with her privately.

Gatsby seemingly takes a liking to Nick, inviting him out on numerous occasions. Gatsby introduces him to Meyer Wolfshiem (Amitabh Bachchan), a gambler Gatsby claims fixed the 1919 World Series. Gatsby tells Nick he was born to wealthy parents who have since passed away. During their lunch, they run into Tom Buchanan. Gatsby appears uncomfortable throughout the exchange. Jordan later tells Nick that Gatsby had a relationship with Daisy five years earlier, and is still in love with her. Gatsby had been throwing the extravagant parties in the hopes Daisy will attend. Gatsby later asks Nick to invite Daisy to tea at his house, without mentioning that Gatsby will be there.

After an awkward reunion, Gatsby and Daisy begin an affair. Gatsby is rather dismayed that Daisy wants to run away from New York with him, as his initial plan being for them was to live in his mansion. Nick tries to explain to Gatsby that the past cannot be repeated, but he dismisses the remark. Trying to keep the affair a secret, Gatsby fires the majority of his servants and discontinues the parties. Eventually, he phones Nick and asks that he and Jordan accompany him to the Buchanan's', where they plan to tell Tom that Daisy is leaving him. Nick is hesitant, but Gatsby insists they need him.

During the luncheon, Tom becomes increasingly suspicious of Gatsby when he sees him staring passionately at Daisy. Daisy stops Gatsby from revealing anything about their relationship, and suggests they all go into town. Everyone leaves for the Plaza, Tom driving Gatsby's car with Nick and Jordan while Gatsby and Daisy take Tom's car. Out of gas, Tom stops at George and Myrtle's garage, where George says he and his wife are moving west, much to Tom's concern. George also voices his suspicions to Tom that his wife may be cheating on him, not knowing that Tom is Myrtle's lover.

At the Plaza, Gatsby tells Tom that he and Daisy are together, claiming that she never loved him. Outraged, Tom accuses Gatsby of making his fortune illegally with Meyer Wolfsheim. Gatsby lashes out at Tom, frightening Daisy. She leaves with Gatsby, this time in his car. After the fight, Nick realizes that it is his thirtieth birthday.

Later that night, Myrtle leaves her husband, rushing out onto the street. She sees Gatsby's yellow car approaching and runs toward it, believing Tom is driving and come for her. She is struck and killed instantly. Afterwards, Tom, Nick, and Jordan stop by the garage when they see a large crowd has gathered and learn about Myrtle's death. Tom tells George, her widowed husband, that the yellow car belongs to Gatsby, in the effort to hide his affair and tells George that Gatsby may have been sleeping with Myrtle. 

Nick finds Gatsby lingering outside the Buchanan's mansion, where Gatsby accidentally reveals that Daisy was the driver, though he intends to take the blame. Gatsby is convinced Daisy will call him the next day. Gatsby ultimately tells Nick of his "origins": that he was born penniless, his real name is James Gatz as well as the true reason why he couldn't return to Daisy after the war. Gatsby tells Nick that he asked Daisy to wait for him, as he wanted to make something of himself to be worthy of her, and soon after he met Meyer Wolfshiem and entered his 'business'. The next morning, Gatsby decides to go for a swim before the pool is drained for the season. He hears the phone ringing, and believing it is Daisy climbs out of the pool as the butler answers the phone. Gatsby is abruptly shot and killed by George, who then turns the gun on himself. Nick had been the one who called, and heard two gunshots.

When Nick invites Daisy to Gatsby's funeral, he learns that she, Tom, and their daughter are leaving New York. The funeral is attended only by reporters and photographers, whom Nick angrily chases out. The media accuses Gatsby of being Myrtle's lover and the one who killed her, leaving Nick the only person knowing the truth. Disgusted with both the city and its people, he leaves New York, but not until he takes a final walk through Gatsby's deserted mansion; reflecting on Gatsby's unique ability of hope and how he lost everything. Back in the sanatorium, he finishes his memoir and initially titles it "Gatsby", then takes out a pen to re-title it, "The Great Gatsby".

==Cast==

* Tobey Maguire as Nick Carraway
* Leonardo DiCaprio as Jay Gatsby
* Carey Mulligan as Daisy Buchanan
* Joel Edgerton as Tom Buchanan
* Elizabeth Debicki as Jordan Baker
* Isla Fisher as Myrtle Wilson 
* Jason Clarke as George Wilson
* Amitabh Bachchan as Meyer Wolfshiem
* Jack Thompson as Dr. Walter Perkins
* Adelaide Clemens as Catherine
* Richard Carter as Herzog
* Max Cullen as Owl Eyes
* Heather Mitchell as Daisy's mother
* Gus Murray as Teddy Barton
* Steve Bisley as Dan Cody
* Vince Colosimo as Michaelis
* Felix Williamson as Henri
* Kate Mulvany as Mrs. Mckee
* Eden Falk as Mr. Mckee
* iOTA as Trimalchio

==Production==

===Development===
Prior to this version, there had already been an opera and numerous film adaptations of F. Scott Fitzgerald's acclaimed 1925 novel of the same name. In December 2008, Variety magazine reported that this film adaptation was to be made with Baz Luhrmann to direct it.

Luhrmann stated that he planned it to be more timely due to its theme of criticizing the often irresponsible lifestyles of wealthy people. In order to commit to the project, in September 2010 Luhrmann moved with his family from Australia to Chelsea in Lower Manhattan, where he had intended to film The Great Gatsby. While Luhrmann was at the Consumer Electronics Show in January 2011, he told The Hollywood Reporter that he had been workshopping The Great Gatsby in 3D, though he had not yet decided whether to shoot in the format. In late January 2011, Luhrmann showed doubt about staying on board with the project, before deciding to stay.

In 2010, it was reported that the film was being set up by Sony Pictures Entertainment but by 2011, Warner Bros. was close to acquiring a deal to finance and take worldwide distribution of The Great Gatsby. 

===Casting===
From left to right: Joel Edgerton and director Baz Luhrmann, Elizabeth Debicki, Carey Mulligan, Tobey Maguire, and producer and designer Catherine Martin at the premiere of The Great Gatsby, Sydney, May 22, 2013
Luhrmann said the results from the movie's workshop process of auditioning actors for roles in The Great Gatsby had been "very encouraging" to him. Leonardo DiCaprio was cast first in the title role of Jay Gatsby. It is the second time that Luhrmann and DiCaprio have worked together, with DiCaprio costarring in Luhrmann's Romeo + Juliet (1996). Tobey Maguire was cast to play Nick Carraway. Reports linked Amanda Seyfried to the lead role of Daisy Buchanan, in October 2010. The next month Deadline Hollywood reported that Luhrmann had been auditioning numerous actresses, including Keira Knightley, Rebecca Hall, Amanda Seyfried, Blake Lively, Abbie Cornish, Michelle Williams, and Scarlett Johansson, as well as considering Natalie Portman, for Daisy. Soon after, with her commitment to Cameron Crowe's We Bought a Zoo, Johansson pulled out. 

On November 15, Luhrmann announced that Carey Mulligan had been cast to play Daisy after reading for the part on 2 November in New York. She got the role shortly after Luhrmann showed her audition footage to Sony Pictures Entertainment executives Amy Pascal and Doug Belgrad, who were impressed by the actress's command of the character. Mulligan burst into tears after learning of her casting via a phone call from Luhrmann, who informed her of his decision while she was on the red carpet at an event in New York. Luhrmann said "I was privileged to explore the character with some of the world's most talented actresses, each one bringing their own particular interpretation, all of which were legitimate and exciting. However, specific to this particular production of The Great Gatsby, I was thrilled to pick up the phone an hour ago to the young Oscar-nominated British actress Carey Mulligan and say to her: 'Hello, Daisy Buchanan.'" 

In April, Ben Affleck was in talks about playing the role of Tom Buchanan but had to pass due to a scheduling conflict with Argo. Several weeks later, Affleck was replaced by Joel Edgerton. Bradley Cooper had previously lobbied for the part and Luke Evans was a major contender. Isla Fisher was cast to play Myrtle Wilson. Australian newcomer Elizabeth Debicki won the part of Jordan Baker, right after graduating from Victorian College of the Arts. When casting for the supporting role of Jordan, the filmmaker said that the character must be "as thoroughly examined as Daisy, for this production, for this time", adding, "It's like Olivier's Hamlet was the right Hamlet for his time. Who would Hamlet be today? Same with a Jordan or a Daisy". In June 2011, Jason Clarke was cast as George B. Wilson. Additionally, Indian actor Amitabh Bachchan makes a cameo appearance as Meyer Wolfshiem; this was his first Hollywood role. 

===Filming===
The Great Gatsby was planned to be filmed in the New York City area where the novel is set, starting in June 2011. The director instead opted to shoot principal photography in Sydney. Filming began on September 5, 2011, at Fox Studios Australia and finished on December 22, 2011, with additional shots filmed in January 2012. The film was shot with Red Epic digital cameras and Zeiss Ultra Prime lenses. Originally scheduled for a December 2012 release, on August 6, 2012, it was reported that the film was being moved to a summer 2013 release date. In September 2012, this date was confirmed to be May 10, 2013. The film opened the 66th Cannes Film Festival on May 15, 2013, shortly following its wide release in RealD 3D and 2D formats.

====Sets====
Beacon Towers in 1922, during the period that Fitzgerald would have known it
In creating the background scenery for the world depicted in the film, designer Catherine Martin stated that the team styled the interior sets of Jay Gatsby's mansion with gilded opulence, in a style that blended establishment taste with Art Deco. The long-destroyed Beacon Towers, thought by scholars to have partially inspired Fitzgerald's Jay Gatsby estate, was used as a main inspiration for Gatsby's home in the film. The filming for the exterior of Jay Gatsby's mansion was the college building of the International College of Management, Sydney, Some inspiration was also drawn from other Gold Coast, Long Island mansions, including Oheka Castle and La Selva Mansion. Features evoking the Long Island mansions were added in post-production. 

The inspiration for the film version of the Buchanan estate came from Old Westbury Gardens. The mansion exterior was built on a soundstage, with digital enhancements added. The interior sets for the Buchanan mansion were inspired by the style of Hollywood Regency. 

The home of Nick Carraway was conceived as an intimate cottage, in contrast with the grandeur of the neighboring Gatsby mansion. Objects chosen adhered to a central theme of what the designers saw as classic Long Island. The architecture conjures American Arts and Crafts, with Gustav Stickley-type furnishings inside and an Adirondack-style swing out. 

The opening scene was filmed from Rivendell Child, Adolescent and Family Unit in Concord, Sydney, only a few kilometres from Sydney 2000 Olympic Stadium.

====Costumes====
Many apparel designers were approached in collaboration of the film's costumes. The Great Gatsby achieved the iconic 1920s look by altering pieces from the Prada and Miu Miu fashion archives. Martin also collaborated with Brooks Brothers, once a bestower of suits to Fitzgerald for the costumes worn by the male cast members and extras. Tiffany and Co. were also involved, helping to bring to life the jewelry, both from Tiffany's archive, as well as original pieces created for the film. Additional support came from Fogal for hosiery and MAC for cosmetics.

Catherine Martin and Miuccia Prada were behind the wardrobe and worked closely together to create pieces with "the European flair that was emerging amongst the aristocratic East Coast crowds in the 1920s" 

Costume historians of the period, however, said that the costumes were not authentic, but instead modernized the 1920s-era fashions to look more like modern fashions. Most prominently, the women were clothed to emphasize their breasts, such as Daisy's push-up bra, in contrast to the flat-chested fashions of the era. While the book was set in 1922, the movie included fashions from the entire decade of the 1920s and even the 1930s. Many of the fashions from archives were concepts from runways and fashion magazines that were never worn by women in real life. Martin says that she took the styles of the 1920s and made them sexier, and was trying to interpret 1920s styles for a modern audience. Alice Jurow, of the Art Deco Society of California, said that she loved the movie, but most of their members prefer more period-perfect films. The men's costumes were more authentic, except that the pants were too tight. Did Hollywood Give the 1920s a Boob Job? 'Gatsby' Costume Designer Tells All, By Lisa Hix, Collector's Weekly, September 18, 2013 

==Marketing==
The first trailer for The Great Gatsby was released on May 22, 2012, almost a year before the film's release. Songs featured in various trailers include: "No Church in the Wild" by Jay-Z and Kanye West; a cover of U2's "Love Is Blindness" performed by Jack White; a cover of The Turtles' Happy Together by the band Filter; a cover of Amy Winehouse's "Back to Black" performed by André 3000 and Beyoncé; "Young and Beautiful" performed by Lana Del Rey; and two songs, "Bedroom Hymns" and "Over the Love", performed by Florence and the Machine. 

On April 15, 2013, Brooks Brothers premiered "The Gatsby Collection", a line of men's clothing, shoes and accessories "inspired by the costumes designed by Catherine Martin for Baz Luhrmann's The Great Gatsby". According to Fashion Weekly, "The looks weren't simply based on 1920s style: the new duds were designed based on the brand's actual archives Brooks Brothers was one of the initial arbiters of Gatsby-era look. The actual costumes, designed by Catherine Martin, will be on display in select Brooks Brothers boutiques." 

On April 17, 2013, Tiffany & Co. unveiled windows at its Fifth Avenue flagship store "inspired by" Luhrmann's film and created in collaboration with Luhrmann and costumer Catherine Martin. The jewelry store also premiered "The Great Gatsby Collection" line of jewelry designed in anticipation of the film. The collection comprises 7 pieces: a brooch, a headpiece (both reportedly based on archival Tiffany designs), a necklace, and four different rings, including one in platinum with a 5.25-carat diamond, priced at $875,000. Tiffany & Co. Official Site: Tiffany & Co. Celebrates Jazz Age Glamour 

The exterior of the Harrods department store in London bears film advertising as part of its window displays.

==Soundtrack==

Released on May 7, the film's soundtrack is also available in a deluxe edition; a Target exclusive release also features three extra tracks. The film score was executive-produced by Jay-Z and The Bullitts. 

Penned by Lana Del Rey and the film's director, Baz Luhrmann, the song "Young and Beautiful" was released to contemporary hit radio as a single, and was used as the film's buzz single. A snippet of the track appeared in the official trailer for the film and played during the scene where the characters portrayed by Leonardo DiCaprio and Carey Mulligan express their romantic feelings for one another. Hip hop magazine Rap-Up called the single "haunting", while MTV called it "somber-sounding". The track performed by Florence and the Machine, "Over the Love", references the "green light" symbol from the novel in its lyrics. Chris Payne of Billboard praised Beyoncé and André 3000's cover of "Back to Black", made unique with a downtempo EDM wobble. The xx recorded "Together" for the film, with Jamie Smith telling MTV that the band's contribution to the soundtrack sounds like "despair", and revealing that it utilizes a 60-piece orchestra.

Speaking of his goals for the movie's musical backdrop, Baz Luhrman expressed his desire to blend the music of the Jazz Age associated with the 1922 setting of the story with a modern spin. Much like his modern twists applied in Moulin Rouge! and Romeo + Juliet, Baz uses the movie's music not as a background, but instead prominently in the foreground, which takes on a character of its own. 

==Reception==

===Box office===
The Great Gatsby earned $144,840,419 in North America, and $206,200,000 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $351,040,419. 

In North America, The Great Gatsby earned $19.4 million on its opening Friday, including $3.25 million from Thursday night and midnight shows. It went on to finish in second place, behind Iron Man 3, during its opening weekend, with $51.1 million. This was the sixth-largest opening weekend for a film that didn't debut in first place, the second largest opening weekend for a film starring Leonardo DiCaprio behind Inception, and Luhrman's highest grossing movie. 

===Critical response===

The Great Gatsby received mixed reviews from critics. A granddaughter of Fitzgerald praised the style and music of the film. 

Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives a score of 49% based on reviews from 257 critics. The site commented that "while certainly ambitious—and every bit as visually dazzling as one might expect—Baz Luhrmann's The Great Gatsby emphasizes visual splendor at the expense of its source material's vibrant heart." Metacritic gives the film a score of 55, indicating "mixed or average reviews" based on 45 reviews by critics. 

Among major critics, Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal felt the elaborate production designs were a misfire and what was "intractably wrong with the film is that there's no reality to heighten; it's a spectacle in search of a soul." Joe Morgenstern, The Grating 'Gatsby', Wall Street Journal, May 9, 2013, Retrieved May 10, 2013. The Chicago Reader review felt "Luhrmann is exactly the wrong person to adapt such a delicately rendered story, and his 3D feature plays like a ghastly Roaring 20s blowout at a sorority house." J.R. Jones, The Great Gatsby 3D, Chicago Reader, accessed May 10, 2013. The positive reviews included A. O. Scott of The New York Times, who felt the adaptation was "a lot of fun" and "less a conventional movie adaptation than a splashy, trashy opera, a wayward, lavishly theatrical celebration of the emotional and material extravagance that Fitzgerald surveyed with fascinated ambivalence"; Scott advised "the best way to enjoy the film is to put aside whatever literary agenda you are tempted to bring with you." A. O. Scott, Shimmying Off the Literary Mantle, The New York Times, May 9, 2013, Retrieved May 10, 2013. Ty Burr of The Boston Globe reserved special praise for Leonardo DiCaprio's performance, saying "magnificent is the only word to describe this performance — the best movie Gatsby by far, superhuman in his charm and connections, the host of revels beyond imagining, and at his heart an insecure fraud whose hopes are pinned to a woman." 

The Scene Magazine gave the movie a "B-" rating, but praised the actors' performances, in particular saying that "the stand-out actor is Joel Edgerton as Tom Buchanan doing an excellent job of showing the character’s gruffness, despite the one-dimensionality given to him". 

Tobey Maguire's role as Nick was given mixed to negative reviews from critics, with Philip French of The Guardian calling him "miscast or misdirected;" Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post saying "Tobey Maguire is his usual recessive presence, barely registering as either a dynamic part of the events he describes or their watchful witness;" and Elizabeth Weitzman of The New York Daily News saying despite "the wry-observational skills needed for Nick's Midwestern decency," the character is "directed toward a wide-eyed, one-note performance." Rick Groen of The Toronto Star star was more positive of Maguire's character, saying "our narrator, prone to his occasionally purple rhetoric. But that imposed conceit, the image of a talented depressive writing from inside the bauble of his imagination, seems to validate his inflated prose and, better yet, lets us re-appreciate its inherent poetry." 

Audiences polled by the market research firm CinemaScore gave The Great Gatsby a "B" grade on average. 

===Accolades===

 Awards 
 Award Date of ceremony Category Recipients and nominees Result 
 Academy Awards March 2, 2014 Best Production Design Catherine Martin (Art Direction); Beverley Dunn (Set Decoration) 
 Best Costume Design Catherine Martin 
 AACTA Awards January 30, 2014 Best Film Baz Luhrmann, Catherine Martin, Douglas Wick, Lucy Fisher, and Catherine Knapman 
 Best Direction Baz Luhrmann 
 Best Adapted Screenplay Baz Luhrmann and Craig Pearce 
 Best Actor in a Leading Role Leonardo DiCaprio 
 Best Actress in a Leading Role Carey Mulligan 
 Best Actor in a Supporting Role Joel Edgerton 
 Best Actress in a Supporting Role Elizabeth Debicki 
 Isla Fisher 
 Best Cinematography Simon Duggan 
 Best Editing Matt Villa, Jason Ballantine, and Jonathan Redmond 
 Best Original Music Score Craig Armstrong 
 Best Sound Wayne Pashley, Jenny Ward, Fabian Sanjurjo, Steve Maslow, Phil Heywood, and Guntis Sics 
 Best Production Design Catherine Martin, Karen Murphy, Ian Gracie, and Beverley Dunn 
 Best Costume Design Catherine Martin, Silvana Azzi Heras, and Kerry Thompson 
 AACTA International Awards January 10, 2014 Best Supporting Actor Joel Edgerton 
 Best Direction Baz Luhrmann 
 Art Directors Guild February 8, 2014 Excellence in Production Design - Period Film Catherine Martin 
 British Academy Film Awards February 16, 2014 Best Costume Design Catherine Martin 
 Best Make-up and Hair Maurizio Silvi, Kerry Warn 
 Best Production Design Catherine Martin, Beverley Dunn 
 Costume Designers Guild February 22, 2014 Excellence in Period Film Catherine Martin 
 Gay and Lesbian Entertainment Critics Association January 21, 2014 Campy Flick of the Year 
 Visually Striking Film of the Year 
 
 Empire Awards March 30, 2014 Best Female Newcomer Elizabeth Debicki 
 Grammy Awards January 26, 2014 Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media Baz Luhrmann 
 Best Song Written For Visual Media Young and BeautifulMusic by Lana Del Rey and Rick Nowels, Lyrics by Lana Del Rey 
 Best Score Soundtrack For Visual Media Craig Armstrong 
 International 3D Society's Creative Arts Awards January 28, 2014 Outstanding Live Action 3D Feature Film 
 Motion Picture Sound Editors Golden Reel Awards February 16, 2014 Best Sound Editing: Music Score in a Feature Film Jason Ruder 
 Satellite Awards February 23, 2014 Best Art Direction and Production Design Catherine Martin (Art Direction); Beverley Dunn (Set Decoration) 
 Best Costume Design Catherine Martin 
 Best Original Song Young and BeautifulMusic by Lana Del Rey and Rick Nowels, Lyrics by Lana Del Rey 
 St. Louis Gateway Film Critics Association December 14, 2013 Best Cinematography Simon Duggan 
 Best Art Direction 
 Best Soundtrack 
 Visual Effects Society Awards February 12, 2014 Outstanding Supporting Visual Effects in a Feature Motion Picture Chris Godfrey, Prue Fletcher and Joyce Cox 
 Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association December 9, 2013 Best Director Baz Luhrmann 
 Best Art Direction Catherine Martin and Beverley Dunn 
 Best Cinematography Simon Duggan 
 Young Artist Awards May 4, 2014 Best Supporting Young Actor in a Feature Film Callan McAuliffe 

==See also==

Other film adaptations of The Great Gatsby include:
* The Great Gatsby (1926 film), a silent film starring Warner Baxter and Lois Wilson
* The Great Gatsby (1949 film), starring Alan Ladd and Betty Field
* The Great Gatsby (1974 film), starring Robert Redford as Gatsby and Mia Farrow as Daisy
* The Great Gatsby (2000 film), a TV film starring Paul Rudd as Nick Carraway, Toby Stephens as Gatsby, and Mira Sorvino as Daisy
* G, a loosely adapted hip hop musical starring Richard T. Jones

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* The Great Gatsby: novel and film information


