[[The Lottery]]

"The Lottery" is a short story by Shirley Jackson, first published in the June 26, 1948 issue of The New Yorker. Written the same month it was published, it is ranked today as "one of the most famous short stories in the history of American literature". It has been described as "a chilling tale of conformity gone mad." 

Response to the story was negative, surprising Jackson and The New Yorker. Readers canceled subscriptions and sent hate mail throughout the summer. The story was banned in the Union of South Africa. Hyman, Stanley Edgar. "Introduction", Just an Ordinary Day. Bantam, 1995. Since then, it has been accepted as a classic American short story, subject to critical interpretations and media adaptations, and it has been taught in middle schools and high schools for decades since its publication.

== Characters and story ==

Details of contemporary small town American life are contrasted with an annual ritual known as "the lottery." In a small village of about 300 residents, the locals are in an excited yet nervous mood on June 27. Children gather stones as the adult townsfolk assemble for their annual event, that in the local tradition is practiced to ensure a good harvest (one character quotes an old proverb: "Lottery in June, corn be heavy soon"), though there are some rumors that nearby communities are talking of "giving up the lottery."

In the first round of the lottery, the head of each family draws a small slip of paper from a black box; Bill Hutchinson gets the one slip with a black spot, meaning that his family has been chosen. In the next round, each Hutchinson family member draws a slip, and Bill's wife Tessie gets the marked slip. In keeping with tradition, each villager obtains a stone and begins to surround Tessie. The story ends as Tessie is stoned to death while she bemoans the unfairness of the situation.

===Lottery process===
The lottery preparations start the night before with Mr. Summers and Mr. Graves making the paper slips and the list of all the families. Once the slips are finished, they are put into a black box, which is stored overnight in a safe at the coal company. The next morning the townspeople start close to 10 a.m. in order to have everything done in time for lunch. First, the heads of the households draw slips until every head of household has a slip. The second round is for the family members to draw. For the first round, the men have to be over sixteen years of age, however in the second round everyone is eligible, no matter their age. After the drawing is over and the person is picked, the slips are allowed to fly off into the wind, after the Hutchinson's family draws the tickets.

==Reception==

=== Readers ===
Many readers demanded an explanation of the situation in the story, and a month after the initial publication, Shirley Jackson responded in the San Francisco Chronicle (July 22, 1948):

Jackson lived in North Bennington, Vermont, and her comment reveals that she had Bennington in mind when she wrote "The Lottery." In a 1960 lecture (printed in her 1968 collection, Come Along with Me), Jackson recalled the hate mail she received in 1948:

The New Yorker kept no records of the phone calls, but letters addressed to Jackson were forwarded to her. That summer she regularly took home 10 to 12 forwarded letters each day. She also received weekly packages from The New Yorker containing letters and questions addressed to the magazine or editor Harold Ross, plus carbon copies of the magazine's responses mailed to letter writers.

=== Critical interpretations ===
Helen E. Nebeker's essay, "'The Lottery': Symbolic Tour de Force," in American Literature (March, 1974), claims that every major name in the story has a special significance.

Fritz Oehlshlaeger, in "The Stoning of Mistress Hutchinson Meaning of Context in 'The Lottery'" (Essays in Literature, 1988), wrote:

The 1992 episode of The Simpsons, "Dog of Death", features a scene referencing "The Lottery". During the peak of the lottery fever in Springfield, news anchor Kent Brockman announces on television that people hoping to get tips on how to win the jackpot have borrowed every available copy of Shirley Jackson's book The Lottery at the local library. One of them is Homer, who throws the book into the fireplace after Brockman reveals that, "Of course, the book does not contain any hints on how to win the lottery. It is, rather, a chilling tale of conformity gone mad." In her book Shirley Jackson: Essays on the Literary Legacy, Bernice Murphy comments that this scene displays some of the most contradictory things about Jackson: "It says a lot about the visibility of Jackson's most notorious tale that more than 50 years after its initial creation it is still famous enough to warrant a mention in the world's most famous sitcom. The fact that Springfield's citizenry also miss the point of Jackson's story completely can perhaps be seen as an indication of a more general misrepresentation of Jackson and her work." 

== Dramatizations ==
In addition to numerous reprints in magazines, anthologies and textbooks, "The Lottery" has been adapted for radio, live television, a 1953 ballet, films in 1969 and 1997, a TV movie, an opera, and a one-act play by Thomas Martin.

=== 1951 radio version ===
NBC's radio adaptation was broadcast March 14, 1951, as an episode of the anthology series . Writer Ernest Kinoy expanded the plot to include scenes at various characters' homes before the lottery and a conversation between Bill and Tessie Hutchinson (Bill suggests leaving town before the lottery happens, but Tessie refuses because she wants to go shopping at Floyd Summers's store after the lottery is over). Kinoy also deleted characters, including two of the Hutchinsons' three children, and added at least one character, John Gunderson, a schoolteacher who publicly objects to the lottery being held, and at first refuses to draw. Finally, Kinoy included an ending scene describing the townspeople's post-lottery activities, and an afterword in which the narrator suggested, "Next year, maybe there won't be a Lottery. It's up to all of us. Chances are, there will be, though." The production was directed by Andrew C. Love. Cast members included Charles Seel, Gail Bonney, Irene Tedrow, Jack Nessler, James Nusser, Jeff Corey, Jeffrey Silver, John McGovern, Louise Lorimer, Steven Chase, and Margaret Brayton. Music was by Morris King. Don Stanley was the announcer. 

=== Television adaptation ===
Ellen M. Violett wrote the first television adaptation, seen on Albert McCleery's Cameo Theatre (1950–55).

=== 1969 film ===
Larry Yust's short film, The Lottery (1969), produced as part of Encyclopædia Britannica's 'Short Story Showcase' series, was ranked by the Academic Film Archive "as one of the two bestselling educational films ever." It has an accompanying ten-minute commentary film, Discussion of "The Lottery" by University of Southern California English professor Dr. James Durbin. Featuring the film debut of Ed Begley, Jr., Yust's adaptation has an atmosphere of naturalism and small town authenticity with its shots of pick-up trucks and townspeople in Fellows, California. The Internet Movie Database (IMDb) entry, as accessed May 9, 2010. 

=== 1996 TV film ===
Anthony Spinner's feature-length TV film, The Lottery, which premiered September 29, 1996, on NBC, is a sequel loosely based on the original Shirley Jackson story. In Spinner's account, the annual lottery is held for religious reasons. Davey Hutchinson, now known as Jason Smith, has moved to Boston, but keeps having flashbacks to and nightmares about the death of his mother. His father (Bill Hutchinson, known as Albert Smith here) is now dying in a mental hospital, and asks his son to pour his ashes on his mother's grave in the town. Davey/Jason goes to the town, but is lied to by the townspeople and told that neither he nor his mother are from the town. He eventually learns that he is not only from the town, but participated 
in the stoning death of his mother when he was six years old. Smith challenges the town by fleeing and then returning with investigators. However, because the town has "plants" in the outside world, he is unable to expose their traditions. He winds up in a mental hospital being watched over by the same doctor his father had.

Director Daniel Sackheim filmed in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, with a cast that included Keri Russell, Dan Cortese, Veronica Cartwright, Sean Murray, Jeff Corey, Salome Jens, and M. Emmet Walsh. It was nominated for a 1997 Saturn Award for Best Single Genre Television Presentation.

== References ==

== Sources ==
* .

== External links ==
* Detailed plot summary of "The Lottery"
* Salon: Jonathan Lethem: "Monstrous Acts and Little Murders"
* The Lottery study guide and teaching guide – analysis, themes, quotes, multimedia for students and teachers

;Audio
* The New Yorker podcast: A. M. Homes discusses and reads "The Lottery"
* NBC Short Story: "The Lottery" (March 14, 1951)
* "The Lottery" read by Maureen Stapleton
* 1988 interview with Judy Oppenheimer

;Video
* 
* 


