[[Toulouse]]

Toulouse (, locally: ; , , medieval Tholoza) is the capital city of the department of Haute-Garonne, in southwestern France. It lies on the banks of the River Garonne, 150 km from the Mediterranean Sea, 230 km from the Atlantic Ocean, and 580 km from Paris. With 1,202,889 inhabitants as of 1 January 2008, the Toulouse metropolitan area is the fourth-largest in France, after Paris (12.1 million), Lyon (2.1 million), and Marseille (1.7 million). 

Toulouse is the centre of the European aerospace industry, with the headquarters of Airbus, Galileo positioning system, the SPOT satellite system, the Airbus Group (former EADS), ATR and the Aerospace Valley, considered as a global cluster.

The city also hosts l'Oncopole de Toulouse, the largest cancer research centre in Europe, the European headquarters of Intel and CNES's Toulouse Space Centre (CST), the largest space centre in Europe. Thales Alenia Space, and Astrium Satellites, Airbus Group's satellite system subsidiary, also have a significant presence in Toulouse. Its world renowned university is one of the oldest in Europe (founded in 1229) and, with more than 119,000 students, is the third-largest university campus of France after Paris and Lyon. Atlas 2005–2006 de l'éducation nationale, Consulté le 11/09/2007 

Toulouse was the capital of the former province of Languedoc (provinces were abolished during the French Revolution), the former Visigothic Kingdom and was the capital of the historical region of Occitania (Southern France). It is now the capital of the Midi-Pyrénées region, the largest region in metropolitan France.

A city with architecture typical of Southern France, Toulouse counts two UNESCO World Heritage sites, the Canal Du Midi (designated in 1996 and shared with other cities), and the Basilica of St. Sernin, designated in 1998 because of its significance to the Santiago de Compostela pilgrimage route.

==Geography==

===Hydrography===
The city is traversed by the Canal de Brienne, the Canal du Midi and the rivers Garonne, Touch and Hers-Mort.

===Climate===
Toulouse has a temperate climate that is usually classified as a humid subtropical climate (Cfa) classification. Toulouse is located at the junction with the Mediterranean climate zone, but uniform precipitation prevents it from being classified this way.

==History==

Vomitorium at the Roman Amphitheatre in Toulouse

===Early history===
The Garonne Valley was a focal point for trade between the Pyrenees, the Mediterranean and the Atlantic since at least the Iron Age.
The historical name of the city, Tolosa (Τώλοσσα, and of its inhabitants, the Tolosates, first recorded in the 2nd century BC), it is of unknown meaning or origin, possibly from Aquitanian, or from Iberian, Albert Dauzat et Charles Rostaing, Dictionnaire étymologique des noms de lieux en France, 2nd ed., Librairie Guénégaud 1978. but has also been connected to the name of the Gaulish Volcae Tectosages. Le Nom de Toulouse de Pierre Moret, 1996, Université Toulouse le Mirail - Toulouse II, p. 11; Histoire de Toulouse, 1974, p. 11. 

Tolosa enters the historical period in the 2nd century BC, when it became a Roman military outpost.
After the conquest of Gaul, it was developed as a Roman city of Gallia Narbonensis. In the 5th century, Tolosa fell to the Visigothic kingdom and became one of its major cities, in the early 6th century even serving as its capital, before it fell to the Franks under Clovis in 507 (Battle of Vouillé). 
From this time, Toulouse was the capital of Aquitaine within the Frankish realm.

In 721, Duke Odo of Aquitaine defeated an invading Umayyad Muslim army at the Battle of Toulouse. Odo's victory was a small obstacle to Muslim expansion into Christian Europe, and Muslims finally occupied a large territory including Poitiers. Charles Martel, a decade later, won the renowned Battle of Tours, also called the Battle of Poitiers.

The Frankish conquest of Septimania followed in the 750s, and a quasi-independent County of Toulouse emerged within the Carolingian sub-kingdom of Aquitaine by the late 8th century.

==County of Toulouse==

Raymond IV, Count of Toulouse was a leader of the First Crusade
During the Carolingian era, the town rose in status, becoming the capital of the County of Toulouse. 
 
In the 12th century, consuls took over the running of the town and these proved to be difficult years. In particular, it was a time of religious turmoil. In Toulouse, the Cathars tried to set up a community here, but were routed by Simon de Montfort's troops. The subsequent arrival of the Inquisition led to a period of religious fervour during which time the Dominican Couvent des Jacobins was founded. 
Governed by Raimond II and a group of city nobles, Toulouse's urban boundaries stretched beyond its walls to the north and as far south as Saint Michel.

In the Treaty of Paris of 1229, Toulouse formally submitted to the crown of France. The county's sole heiress Joan was engaged to Alphonse, Count of Poitiers, a younger brother of Louis IX of France. The marriage became legal in 1241, but it remained childless so that after Joan's death the county fell to the crown of France by inheritance.
Also in 1229, University of Toulouse was established after the Parisian model, intended as a means to dissolve the heretic movement.
Various monastic orders, like the congregation of the order of frères prêcheurs, were started. They found home in Les Jacobins. In parallel, a long period of inquisition began inside the Toulouse walls. The fear of repression obliged the notabilities to exile, or to convert themselves. The inquisition lasted nearly 400 years, making Toulouse its capital. Count Raimond VII was convicted of heresy and died in 1249 without an heir.

===Within the Kingdom of France===
In 1271, Toulouse incorporated within the kingdom of France and declared a "royal city". With this accolade, it started to transform itself into an intellectual and artistic centre.
But the 14th century was to mark a downturn in the city's fortunes. 
First came outbreaks of plague, then the Hundred Years' War. Famine and floods also took their toll on the city. Despite strong immigration, the population lost 10,000 inhabitants in 70 years. Toulouse only had 22,000 people in 1405.
In 1323 the Consistori del Gay Saber was established in Toulouse to preserve the lyric art of the troubadours. Toulouse became the centre of Occitan literary culture for the next hundred years; the Consistori was last active in 1484.

It was not until the 15th century that Toulouse started to enjoy a 'golden age'. Reinforcing its place as an administrative center, the city grew richer, participating in the trade of Bordeaux wine with England, as well as cereals and textiles. A Parliament was set up here by Charles VII and the city's merchants grew ever wealthier. Their economic well-being was mostly based on a plant-based blue dye known as pastel, which they exported throughout Europe. These pastel merchants built grand town houses and, before long, both architecture and the fine arts flourished in the city as never before.

The bubble finally burst in the mid-16th century. Another blue dye arrived from America, known as indigo. It wiped out the pastel trade in one fell swoop. Religious conflict broke out between the Catholics and the Calvinists. During the same time, buildings were destroyed by fire and there were yet more outbreaks of famine and plague.

The Capitole de Toulouse is an example of the 18th-century architectural projects in the city.
In 1761, a Toulouse merchant, Jean Calas, was accused of murdering his own son to prevent his conversion to Catholicism. Calas was put to death a year later. Toulouse's persecution of Protestants such as Calas was widely condemned and religious intolerance did gradually disappear.

During the remainder of the 18th century, the city was slowly modernised. This included a period of urban rebuilding, which began in earnest from 1750. New projects included the building of the Jardin Royal. The Grand Rond also dates to this period, along with the Canal de Brienne and the Quai Dillon.

===Within the French Republic===
The Battle of Toulouse (1814) was one of the final battles of the Napoleonic Wars, four days after Napoleon's surrender of the French Empire to the nations of the Sixth Coalition.
Toulouse, the regional capital, proved stoutly defended by Marshal Soult.

In 1856, the Matabiau Station was opened, launching a new age in transportation. Other transport improvements included the widening of streets to form more spacious boulevards. Gradually, Toulouse emerged as a modern French city.

During the early decades of 20th-century history, Toulouse witnessed the mass arrival of immigrants from northern France, Italy and Spain. New industries arrived in the city, including aircraft manufacturing and chemical factories. The French airmail service was set up here too, while in the Second World War, Toulouse played a vital role in the Resistance movement.

In the 1960s, a new wave of immigrants arrived in the city, this time from Algeria. New homes were built and the city's boundaries were extended yet further. Toulouse's industry interests have more recently reached out to include space exploration and electronics, and today, it is France's fourth-largest city.

==Population==

 Historical population 
 Urban Area MetropolitanArea 
 1695 43,000 
 1750 48,000 
 1790 52,863 
 1801 50,171 
 1831 59,630 
 1851 95,277 
 1872 126,936 
 1911 149,000 
 1936 213,220 
 1946 264,411 
 1954 268,865 
 1962 329,044 
 1968 439,764 474,000 
 1975 509,939 585,000 
 1982 541,271 645,000 
 1990 650,336 797,373 
 1999 761,090 964,797 
 2009 871,961 1,218,166 

The population of the city proper (French: commune) was 440,204 at the 1 Jan 2009 census, with 1,218,166 inhabitants in the metropolitan area (French: aire urbaine) (within the 2009 borders of the metropolitan area), up from 964,797 at the March 1999 census (within the 1999 borders of the metropolitan area). Within its 2009 borders, the metropolitan area population has grown at the record rate of +1.87% per year between 1999 and 2009. 

Toulouse is the fourth largest city in France, after Paris, Marseille and Lyon, and the fourth-largest metropolitan area after Paris, Lyon, and Marseille.

Fueled by booming aerospace and high-tech industries, population growth of 1.49% a year in the metropolitan area in the 1990s (compared with 0.37% for metropolitan France), and a record 1.87% a year in the 2000s (0.68% for metropolitan France), which is the highest population growth of any French metropolitan area larger than 500,000 inhabitants, means the Toulouse metropolitan area has overtaken Lille as the fourth-largest metropolitan area of France in 2009.

A local Jewish group estimates there are about 2,500 Jewish families in Toulouse. A Muslim association has estimated there are some 35,000 Muslims in town. 

==Government and politics==

===Community of the Agglomeration of Greater Toulouse===

The Community of Agglomeration of Greater Toulouse (Communauté d'agglomération du Grand Toulouse) was created in 2001 to better coordinate transport, infrastructure and economic policies between the city of Toulouse and its immediate independent suburbs. It succeeds a previous district which had been created in 1992 with less powers than the current council. It combines the city of Toulouse and 24 independent communes, covering an area of 380 km², totalling a population of 583,229 inhabitants (as of 1999 census), 67% of whom live in the city of Toulouse proper. As of February 2004 estimate, the total population of the Community of Agglomeration of Greater Toulouse was 651,209 inhabitants, 65.5% of whom live in the city of Toulouse. Due to local political feuds, the Community of Agglomeration only hosts 61% of the population of the metropolitan area, the other independent suburbs having refused to join in. Since 2009, the Community of agglomeration has become an urban community (in French: communauté urbaine).

===Local politics===
The Capitole of Toulouse, and the square of the same name with the Occitan cross designed by Raymond Moretti on the ground
The fountain in "Wilson Square" shows the poet Pèire Godolin

One of the major political figures in Toulouse was Dominique Baudis, the mayor of Toulouse between 1983 and 2001, member of the centrist UDF. First known as a journalist famous for his coverage of the war in Lebanon, 36 year-old Dominique Baudis succeeded his father Pierre Baudis in 1983 as mayor of Toulouse. (Pierre Baudis was mayor from 1971 to 1983.) The Baudis dynasty succeeded in turning Toulouse into a center-right stronghold, whereas historically the city had been left-leaning since the 19th century. Dominique Baudis is also known as a writer who wrote historical novels about the ancient counts of Toulouse, their crusade in the Middle East, and the Albigensian Crusade.

During his time as mayor, Toulouse's economy and population boomed. He tried to strengthen the international role of Toulouse (such as its Airbus operations), as well as revive the cultural heritage of the city. The Occitan cross, flag of Languedoc and symbol of the counts of Toulouse, was chosen as the new flag of the city, instead of the traditional coat of arms of Toulouse (which included the fleur de lis of the French monarchy). Many cultural institutions were created, in order to attract foreign expatriates and emphasise the city's past. For example, monuments dating from the time of the counts of Toulouse were restored, the city's symphonic concert hall (Halle aux Grains) was refurbished, a city theater was built, a Museum of Modern Art was founded, the Bemberg Foundation (European paintings and bronzes from the Renaissance to the 20th century) was established, a huge pop music concert venue (Zénith, the largest in France outside Paris) was built, the space museum and educational park Cité de l'Espace was founded, etc.

To deal with growth, major housing and transportation projects were launched. Perhaps the one for which Baudis is most famous is the Toulouse Metro: line A of the underground was opened in 1993, and Baudis succeeded in having work started on line B (which opened in 2007), despite strong local opposition to the anticipated costs. The creation of a system of underground car parking structures in Toulouse city centre was sharply criticised by the Green Party. 

Despite all these massive undertakings, the city's economy proved so strong that Dominique Baudis was able to announce, in 1999, that the city had finished repaying its debt, making it the only large city in France ever to achieve solvency. In Europe, typical per capita city debt for a city the size of Toulouse is around 1,200 euros. Achieving solvency was a long-standing goal for Baudis, who had said that he would extinguish city debt before leaving office. Local opposition, however, has criticised this achievement, saying that the task of governments is not to run zero-deficit, but to ensure the well-being of citizens, through social benefits, housing programs for poor people, etc. 

In 2000, Dominique Baudis was at the zenith of his popularity, with approval rates of 85%. He announced that he would not run for a fourth (6-year) term in 2001. He explained that with 3 terms he was already the longest-serving mayor of Toulouse since the French Revolution; he felt that change would be good for the city, and that the number of terms should be limited. He endorsed Philippe Douste-Blazy, then UDF mayor of Lourdes as his successor. Baudis has since been appointed president of the CSA (Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel) in Paris, the French equivalent of the American FCC.

Philippe Douste-Blazy narrowly won in the 2001 elections, which saw the left making its best showing in decades. Douste-Blazy had to deal with a reinvigorated political opposition, as well as with the dramatic explosion of the AZF plant in late 2001.

In March 2004, he entered the national government, and left Toulouse in the hands of his second-in-command Jean-Luc Moudenc, elected mayor by the municipal council. In March 2008, Moudenc was defeated by the Socialist Party's candidate Pierre Cohen.

At the next elections in 2014 Moudenc defeated Cohen in a rematch to re-take the job with more than 52% of the votes.

===Mayors===

 Mayor Term start Term end Party 
 Raymond Badiou 1944 September 1958 SFIO 
 G. Carrère September 1958 October 16, 1958 SFIO 
 Louis Bazerque October 16, 1958 1971 SFIO 
 Pierre Baudis March 1971 March 1983 UDF 
 Dominique Baudis March 1983 January 23, 2001 UDF 
 Guy Hersant January 23, 2001 March 23, 2001 UDF 
 Philippe Douste-Blazy March 23, 2001 April 30, 2004 UDF 
 Françoise de Veyrinas April 30, 2004 May 6, 2004 UMP 
 Jean-Luc Moudenc May 6, 2004 March 17, 2008 UMP 
 Pierre Cohen March 17, 2008 April 4, 2014 PS 
 Jean-Luc Moudenc April 4, 2014 incumbent UMP 
 

==Sights==
Toulouse Cathedral

The Capitole de Toulouse (mainly 18th century), houses the Hôtel de Ville, the Théâtre du Capitole (opera house), and the Donjon du Capitole (16th century). It is located on the Place du Capitole. Cité de l'espace (City of Space) is a theme park of space exploration. The Médiathèque José Cabanis is a library. The Jardin des Plantes is a botanical garden. The most significant Hôtel particulier (palace) in Toulouse is the Hôtel d'Assézat.

The Bazacle is a ford across the Garonne, built in the late 12th century and also used for hydroelectricty. The river is crossed by the Pont Neuf from the 16th century.

===Religious buildings===
Toulouse Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Toulouse. Saint-Sernin Basilica, part of the Way of Saint James UNESCO World Heritage Site, is the largest Romanesque church in Europe. It contains what is widely considered the most beautiful pipe organ in France. The Daurade basilica, of the 18th–19th century, was founded as a temple to the Roman god Apollo before conversion to Christianity in 410 AD. The Church of the Jacobins in Toulouse is the burial place of Saint Thomas Aquinas.

==Economy==
The main Airbus factory in Blagnac, near Toulouse, lies next to Toulouse Airport
The main industries are aeronautics, space, electronics, information technology and biotechnology. Toulouse hosts the Airbus headquarters and assembly-lines of Airbus A320, A330, A340, and A380, the others (A318, A319, A321 and A380 interior furnishing) being in Hamburg, Germany. Airbus intends to relocate Toulouse A320 final assembly activity to Hamburg, with A350 and A380 production going in the opposite direction as part of its Power8 organization plan begun under ex-CEO Christian Streiff. "." Forbes. 15 January 2007. Airbus has its head office in Blagnac, near Toulouse. "Airbus A380 lands after making aviation history." USA Today. 27 April 2005. Updated 28 April 2005. Retrieved 12 February 2010. "Contacts." Airbus. Retrieved 12 February 2010. Airbus's France division has its main office in Toulouse. Toulouse also hosts the headquarters of ATR and Groupe Latécoère.

According to Newsweek, Toulouse ranked as the fifth most dynamic city in the world in 2006. The Ten Most Dynamic Cities – Newsweek 

==Colleges and universities==
A typical "Pink City" street at sunset
Toulouse has the third-largest student population in France after Lyon and Paris with 119,000 students.

The University of Toulouse (Université de Toulouse), established in 1229, is located here (now split into three separate universities). Like the universities in Oxford and Paris, the University of Toulouse was established at a time when Europeans were starting to translate the writings of Arabs of Andalus and Greek philosophers. These writings challenged European ideology—inspiring scientific discoveries and advances in the arts—as society began seeing itself in a new way. These colleges were supported by the Church, in hopes of reconciling Greek philosophy and Christian theology.
*Université Toulouse I, Toulouse School of Economics and Institut d'études politiques de Toulouse
*University of Toulouse II – Le Mirail
*Université Paul Sabatier (Toulouse III)

Toulouse is also the home of Toulouse Business School (ESC Toulouse), Toulouse School of Economics (TSE), the Institut supérieur européen de gestion group (ISEG Group), the Institut supérieur européen de formation par l'action (ISEFAC) and several engineering schools:
*ICAM Toulouse (Institut catholique d'arts et métiers)
* -Institute Franco Europeen de Chiropratique: IFEC Un des deux seuls écoles de chiropratique dans toute la France l'IFEC est une école reconnue internationalement et renommé. 
*INSA Toulouse
*ISAE SUPAERO (École Nationale Supérieure de l'Aéronautique et de l'Espace)
*ISAE ENSICA (École nationale supérieure d'ingénieurs de constructions aéronautiques)
*ENAC (École Nationale de l'Aviation Civile)
*INP ENSEEIHT (École Nationale Supérieure d'Électronique, d'Électrotechnique, d'Informatique, d'Hydraulique et des Télécommunications)
*INP ENSIACET (École nationale supérieure d'ingénieurs en art chimique et technologique)
*INP ENSAT ('École Nationale Supérieure Agronomique de Toulouse)
*EPITECH (École pour l'informatique et les nouvelles technologies or European Institute of Information Technology)
*IPSA (Institut Polytechnique des Sciences Avancées)
*EIPurpan (École d'ingénieurs de Purpan)

According to the French newspaper "L'Etudiant", Toulouse is the best city in France to study, and according to the British company QS (Quacquarelli Symonds), Toulouse is the 46th best student city in the world.

The most well known high schools in Toulouse are , Lycée Saint-Joseph and Lycée Saint-Sernin.
In 2012 a Jewish school was struck by an attack in which a rabbi, his two sons and the daughter of the school's director were Midi-Pyrénées shootings#19 March: Ozar Hatorah school in Toulouse|murdered by Mohammed Merah].

==Transport==
Line A of the Toulouse Metro.
In addition to an extensive bus system, the Toulouse Metro is a VAL (Véhicule Automatique Léger) metro system made up of driverless (automatic) rubber-tired trains. Line A runs for 12.5 km from Balma-Gramont in the north-east to Basso Cambo in the south-west. Line B, which opened in June 2007, serves 20 stations north to south and intersects line A at Jean Jaurès. Line C has existed since line A was completed. It is not VAL but an urban railway line operated by SNCF. It connects to line A at Arènes. Similarly, Line D runs south from Toulouse Matabiau to Muret. The tramway line T1 (operating since December 2010), runs from Beauzelle to Toulouse passing through Blagnac. All urban bus, metro and tram services are operated by Tisséo.

In 2007, a city-wide bicycle rental scheme called VélôToulouse was introduced, with bicycles available from automated stations for a daily, weekly, monthly or yearly subscription.

Airports include:
* Toulouse Blagnac, the principal local airport
* Toulouse Lasbordes

The main railway station, with regional and national services, is Toulouse-Matabiau. The Canal du Midi begins in Toulouse and runs up to Sète.

==Communications==
Toulouse is the home of Bonhoure Radio Tower, a 61-metre high lattice tower used for FM and TV transmission. In 2001 a large (100 km) optical fiber (symmetric 360Gbit/s) network named
Infrastructure Métropolitaine de Télécommunications was deployed around the city and suburbs. 

==Culture==
Musée des Augustins
Tolosa, Occitania's capital, in occitan
The Théâtre du Capitole is the home of opera and ballet; there has been a theatre on the site since 1736. The Orchestre National du Capitole, long associated with Michel Plasson, plays at the Halle aux Grains. 

Le Château d'Eau gallery, an old 19th-century water-tower, was converted as a gallery in 1974 by Jean Dieuzaide, a French photographer from Toulouse and is now one of the oldest public places dedicated to photography in the world. Toulouse's art museums include the Musée des Augustins, the Musée Georges Labit, and the Fondation Bemberg in the Hôtel d'Assézat. The Musée Saint-Raymond is devoted to Antiquity and the Muséum de Toulouse to natural history.

Toulouse is the seat of the Académie des Jeux Floraux, the equivalent of the French Academy for the Occitan-speaking regions of southern France, making Toulouse the unofficial capital of Occitan culture. The traditional Occitan cross was adopted as the symbol of both the City of Toulouse and the newly founded Midi-Pyrénées région.

The city's gastronomic specialties include Saucisses de Toulouse, a type of sausage, cassoulet Toulousain, a bean and pork stew, and garbure, a cabbage soup with poultry. Also, foie gras, the liver of an overfed duck or goose, is a delicacy mainly made in the Midi-Pyrénées.

==Sport==
Toulouse Olympique playing rugby league against Gateshead Thunder (June 2009)
Stade Toulousain of the Top 14 is considered one of the finest rugby union clubs in all of Europe, having been crowned the Heineken Cup champions four times.

Toulouse Olympique represents the city in Rugby League, playing in the Elite One Championship. There are plans for the club to join the European Super League in 2015. Both rugby clubs share the Stade Ernest-Wallon.

The city also has a professional football team, Toulouse FC, who play in Ligue 1, the highest level of football in France, and won the 1957 Coupe de France Final. The club play at the Stadium Municipal, which was a venue during the 1998 FIFA World Cup and 2007 Rugby World Cup, as well as hosting important club rugby games and several Rugby League World Cups. Toulouse was also a host of EuroBasket 1999.

==Notable people==

Bust of mathematician Pierre de Fermat in the Capitole de Toulouse
Several notable Toulousains have been scientists, such as Jean Dausset, 1980 winner of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine; 17th-century mathematician Pierre de Fermat, who spent his life in Toulouse, where he wrote Fermat's Last Theorem and was a lawyer in the city's Parlement; Paul Sabatier, 1912 winner of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.

Musically, Toulouse is one of the two controversial, disputed birthplaces of Carlos Gardel (the other being Tacuarembo, Uruguay), probably the most prominent figure in the history of the tango, and the city's most renowned singer is Claude Nougaro.

Raymond IV, Count of Toulouse, one of the leaders of the First Crusade, was born in Toulouse. Aviation pioneer Clément Ader and psychiatrist Jean-Étienne Dominique Esquirol were also natives.

==International relations==

===Twin towns and sister cities===
Toulouse is twinned with:

 : Tripoli, Lebanon : Bologna, Italy : Bristol, United Kingdom : Chongqing, China : Elche, Spain : Kiev, Ukraine : Tel Aviv, Israel : Rosario, Argentina : Stavanger, Norway : Buenos Aires, Argentina : Grozny, Russia : Atlanta, United States 

Toulouse also has accords of cooperation with the following towns:

 : Bydgoszcz, Poland : Düsseldorf, Germany : Hanoi, Vietnam : N'Djamena, Chad : Saint-Louis, Senegal : São José dos Campos, Brazil : Zaragoza, Aragón, Spain 

In addition, Toulouse has an adopted city:
: Câmpia Turzii, Romania

==See also==

* 138 Tolosa, an asteroid
* Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Toulouse
*André Abbal
* Listing of the works of Alexandre Falguière
* The works of Antonin Mercié

==References==

===Bibliography===
* 
*

==External links==

* ToulouseCity.com
* Toulouse : pink, violets, red and black - Official French website
* Official site
* Greater Toulouse Council
* Virtual Tour in Toulouse, with 360° full-screen panoramas
* Toulouse Tourist Office
* Les Abattoirs Modern Arts
* Website of the Bemberg Foundation
* Website of the Saint Raymond Museum
* Toulouse-Blagnac International Airport
* Wikitoulouse.fr Haisoft.fr, comprehensive wiki devoted to Toulouse.
* Culture in Toulouse
* Rainbow Toulouse
* English In Toulouse—Meeting for native speakers
* Americans-In-Toulouse International Club
* Chinese In Toulouse—Meeting for native speakers
*INSEE

 


