[[Woodrow Wilson]]

Thomas Woodrow Wilson (December 28, 1856 – February 3, 1924) was the 28th President of the United States from 1913 to 1921. A leader of the Progressive Movement, he served as President of Princeton University from 1902 to 1910, and then as Governor of New Jersey from 1911 to 1913. With the of the Republican Party (United States)#The Progressive Era: 1896–1932|Republican Party split] in 1912, he led his Democratic Party to control both the White House and Congress for the first time in nearly two decades. The Democrats last held control of both the White House and Congress from 1893–1895. 

Biographer John Milton Cooper opines that Wilson, in his first term as president, persuaded a Democratic Congress to pass a legislative agenda that few presidents have equaled, remaining unmatched until the New Deal in 1933. Cooper, John Milton. "Woodrow Wilson: A Biography". p. 201 This agenda included the Federal Reserve Act, Federal Trade Commission Act, the Clayton Antitrust Act, the Federal Farm Loan Act and an income tax. Child labor was curtailed by the Keating–Owen Act of 1916, but the U.S. Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional in 1918. Wilson also facilitated passage of the Adamson Act, which imposed an 8-hour workday for railroads. Although considered a modern liberal visionary as President, Wilson was "deeply racist in his thoughts and politics" and his administration is said to have racially segregated federal employees and the Navy. 

Narrowly re-elected in 1916 around the slogan "He kept us out of war", Wilson's second term was dominated by American entry into World War I. While American non-interventionist sentiment was strong, American neutrality was challenged in early 1917 when Germany began unrestricted submarine warfare despite repeated strong warnings.

In April 1917, Wilson asked Congress to declare war in order to make "the world safe for democracy." During the war, Wilson focused on diplomacy and financial considerations, leaving military particulars in the hands of the Army. On the home front in 1917, he began the first large-scale draft and borrowed billions of dollars in war funding through the newly established Federal Reserve Bank and Liberty Bonds. He set up the War Industries Board, promoted labor union cooperation and supervised agriculture and food production through the Lever Act. Wilson took over control of the railroads and gave a well-known Flag Day speech that fueled the wave of anti-German sentiment sweeping the country. He also suppressed anti-war movements with the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918, a crackdown which broadened and intensified to include real and suspected anarchists and communists during the First Red Scare of 1919–1920. After years of opposition, in 1918 Wilson was pressured to change his position on women's suffrage, which he then advocated as a war measure. Lemons, J. Stanley (1973). The Woman Citizen: Social Feminism in the 1920s p. 13. University of Virginia Press, 1973 

In the late stages of the war, Wilson took personal control of negotiations with Germany, including the armistice. In 1918, he issued his Fourteen Points, the view of a post-war world that could avoid another terrible conflict. In 1919, he went to Paris to promote the formation of a League of Nations to the Treaty of Versailles, with special attention on creating new nations out of defunct empires. During an intense debate with Henry Cabot Lodge and the Republican-controlled Senate over the proposed power of the League of Nations to force the U.S. into war, Wilson suffered a severe stroke that, according to some, left his wife largely in control of the White House until he left office in March 1921. Despite his poor health, he was able to block any compromises that would enable the Senate to ratify the Treaty of Versailles, and attempted to run for a third term. With Wilson growing increasingly unpopular, and in poor health, Republican Warren G. Harding promised a "a return to normalcy" and was elected in an unprecedented popular vote landslide in 1920. Harding's landslide would be surpassed in the popular vote by Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1936, Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964, and Richard Nixon in 1972. Notably, Harding is the only candidate to win more than 60% despite the Solid South voting largely against him. Johnson barely carried the Southern vote in 1964. Franklin D Roosevelt and Nixon had strong Southern support in their victories. Wilson was too ill to leave Washington in the last 18 months of his presidency that the presidential duties were carried out by his wife, Edith Wilson. He later died there in 1924.

An intellectual with a mastery of political language, Wilson was a highly effective partisan campaigner as well as legislative strategist. His biographer Arthur Link says, "He was a virtuoso and a spellbinder during a time when the American people admired oratory above all other political skills. But as a spellbinder he appealed chiefly to men's minds and spirits, and only infrequently to their passions." A Presbyterian of deep religious faith, Wilson appealed to a gospel of service and infused a profound sense of moralism into his idealistic internationalism, now referred to as "Wilsonian". Wilsonianism calls for the United States to enter the world arena to fight for democracy, and has been a contentious position in American foreign policy. Cooper, Woodrow Wilson (2009) p. 560. For his sponsorship of the League of Nations, Wilson was awarded the 1919 Nobel Peace Prize. Woodrow Wilson bio sketch from NobelFoundation.org 

==Early life==
Wilson c. mid 1870s
Wilson was born in Staunton, Virginia, on December 28, 1856, at 18–24 North Coalter Street (now the Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library), of Scots-Irish descent. Heckscher (1991), p. 4. He was the third of four children of Joseph Ruggles Wilson (1822–1903) and Jessie Janet Woodrow (1826–1888). John Milton Cooper, Woodrow Wilson: A Biography (2009) pp. 13–19 Wilson's paternal grandparents immigrated to the United States from Strabane, County Tyrone, Ireland (now Northern Ireland), in 1807. His mother was born in Carlisle, Cumberland, England, the daughter of Rev. Dr. Thomas Woodrow from Paisley, Scotland, and Marion Williamson from Glasgow. 

Wilson's father Joseph Ruggles Wilson was originally from Steubenville, Ohio, where his grandfather published a pro-tariff and anti-slavery newspaper, The Western Herald and Gazette. p. 4 Wilson's parents moved south in 1851 and identified with the Confederacy. His father defended slavery, owned slaves and set up a Sunday school for them; the parents cared for wounded soldiers at their church, and his father briefly served as a chaplain to the Confederate Army. Woodrow Wilson's earliest memory, from the age of three, was of hearing that Abraham Lincoln had been elected and that a war was coming. Wilson would forever recall standing for a moment at Robert E. Lee's side and looking up into his face. 

Wilson's father was one of the founders of the Southern Presbyterian Church in the United States (PCUS) in 1861 after it split from the northern Presbyterians. He served as the first permanent clerk of the southern church's General Assembly, was Stated Clerk from 1865 to 1898 and was Moderator of the PCUS General Assembly in 1879. He became minister of the First Presbyterian Church in Augusta, Georgia, and the family lived there until young Wilson was 14. Wilson himself in 1873 formally became a member of the Columbia First Presbyterian Church and remained a member throughout his life. Heckscher (1991), p. 23. 

==Education==
Wilson was over ten years of age before he learned to read. His reading handicap may have been dyslexia; in later years he attributed these difficulties to the lack of schools in the post bellum South. As a teenager he taught himself the Graham shorthand system to compensate. Heckscher (1991), p. 22 He was quite able to achieve academically through determination and self-discipline. He studied at home under his father's guidance and took classes in a small school in Augusta. Link Road to the White House pp. 3–4. 
During Reconstruction, Wilson lived in Columbia, South Carolina from 1870 to 1874, while his father was professor at the Columbia Theological Seminary. Walworth ch 1 

Wilson attended Davidson College in North Carolina for the 1873–1874 school year. After medical ailments kept him from returning for a second year, he transferred to Princeton as a freshman when his father took a teaching position at the university. Graduating in 1879, Wilson became a member of Phi Kappa Psi fraternity. Beginning in his second year, he read widely in political philosophy and history. Wilson credited the British parliamentary sketch-writer Henry Lucy as his inspiration to enter public life. He was active in the undergraduate American Whig–Cliosophic Society literary and debating society, serving as speaker of the Whig Party and writing for the Nassau Literary Review, organized a separate Liberal Debating Society, Link, Wilson I:5–6; Wilson Papers I: 130, 245, 314 and later coached the Whig–Clio Debate Panel. In the hotly contested election of 1876, Wilson declared his support for the Democratic Party and its nominee, Samuel J. Tilden. Heckscher (1991), p. 35. 

In 1879, Wilson attended law school at the University of Virginia for one year. Although he never graduated, during his time at the university he was deeply involved in the Virginia Glee Club and the Jefferson Literary and Debating Society, serving as the society's president. While there, he enjoyed frequent trips to his birthplace Staunton where he visited with cousins, and fell in love with one, Hattie Woodrow, though his affections were unrequited. Heckscher (1991), p. 53. His health then became frail and dictated withdrawal, so he went home to Wilmington, North Carolina, where he continued his law studies. 

In January 1882, Wilson accepted an invitation to practice law in Atlanta. He joined a University of Virginia classmate, Edward Ireland Renick, as partner in May 1882; he was admitted to the Georgia Bar that year. Heckscher (1991), p. 58. The practice of law was a brief attempt by Wilson; competition was fierce in a city with 143 other lawyers, and he found few cases to keep him occupied. Moreover, though he found legal history and the evolution of substantive jurisprudence interesting, he abhorred the day to day procedural aspects of law practice, and after less than a year resolved to pursue his more intense interest in research, writing and teaching in the field of political science. Both parents expressed misplaced concern over what they perceived to be a premature decision, after previous false starts in his educational pursuits. Heckscher (1991), p. 59. 

In April 1883, Wilson applied to the new Johns Hopkins University to study for a doctorate in history and political science and began his studies there in the fall. Three years later completed his doctoral dissertation, "Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics", Internet Archive: Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics (1885), accessed January 6, 2011 and received a Ph.D. in history and political science. For his doctorate, Wilson had to learn German as his required foreign language. 

In late spring of 1883 Wilson was called upon to journey to Rome, Georgia to assist in the settlement of his maternal uncle William's estate which was being unsatisfactorily administered by a brother-in-law. While there he met and fell in love with Ellen Louise Axson, the daughter of a minister from Savannah, Georgia; he proposed to her and they became engaged in Asheville. Heckscher (1991), p. 62–65. 

==Married life and personal interests==
Ellen Axson Wilson (1883)
Wilson's eagerness to set a wedding date met with some initial hesitancy on Ellen's part due to traumatic developments in her family. In late 1883 Ellen's father Edward began suffering from severe depression and ultimately was admitted to the Georgia State Mental Hospital, where in 1884 he committed suicide. After closing the family home in Rome, Georgia and recovering from the initial shock, Ellen advanced her artistic interests by gaining admission to the Art Students League of New York; post graduation, she pursued portrait art and received a medal for one of her works from the Paris International Exposition. These endeavors provided much needed relief, and even independence, in the wake of the family trauma. Nevertheless she ultimately, and happily, agreed to sacrifice further independent artistic pursuits in order to keep her marriage commitment, and In 1885 she and Wilson married. Heckscher, p. 71–73. 

They had three daughters: Margaret Woodrow Wilson (1886–1944); Jessie Wilson (1887–1933); and Eleanor R. Wilson (1889–1967). Cooper (2009) pp. 57–62 Ellen Axson Wilson died in 1914. Wilson is one of only three presidents to be widowed while in office. 

The next year, Wilson married Edith Galt, a direct descendant of the Native American woman Pocahontas through one of the First Families of Virginia. Cooper (2009) p. 281 

Wilson was an early automobile enthusiast, and he took daily rides while he was President. His favorite car was a 1919 Pierce-Arrow, in which he preferred to ride with the top down. "The Pierce Arrow Limousine", Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library His enjoyment of motoring made him an advocate of funding for public highways. Weingroff, Richard F., "President Woodrow Wilson – Motorist Extraordinaire", Federal Highway Administration 

Wilson was an avid baseball fan. In 1915, he became the first sitting president to attend a World Series game. Wilson had been a center fielder during his Davidson College days. When he transferred to Princeton, he was unable to make the varsity team and became the team's assistant manager. He was the first President to throw out a first ball at a World Series game. "By the Numbers" – 1915, CNNSI, October 17, 2002. Retrieved February 27, 2010. 

He cycled regularly, including several cycling vacations in the English Lake District. Wilson, Andrew (1996), A President's Love Affair with the Lake District: Woodrow Wilson's 'Second Home, Lakeland Press Agency Unable to cycle around Washington, D.C., as President, Wilson took to playing golf, although he played with more enthusiasm than skill. Van Natta, Don Jr. (2003), First Off the Tee: Presidential Hackers, Duffers, and Cheaters from Taft to Bush PublicAffairs Wilson holds the record of all the presidents for the most rounds of golf, over 1,000, or almost one every other day. During the winter, the Secret Service painted golf balls with black paint so Wilson could hit them around in the snow on the White House lawn. Weinstein, Edwin A. (1981), Woodrow Wilson: A Medical and Psychological Biography, Princeton 

==Early career in academics==
During the academic year 1886–1887, Wilson was a visiting lecturer at Cornell University, but failed to gain a permanent position. However, he was tapped into the Irving Literary Society by the brothers of his fraternity, Phi Kappa Psi. He joined the faculty of the newly created Bryn Mawr College in 1885 until 1888, teaching ancient Greek and Roman history; while there he refused offers for other positions at the Universities of Michigan and Indiana. Heckscher, pp. 77–82. When Ellen was pregnant with their first child in 1886, she and Woodrow decided, in light of the inadequate lodgings, it would be best for Ellen to go to her Aunt Louisa Brown's residence in Gainesville, Georgia to have their first child; she arrived just one day before the baby, Margaret, was born. Heckscher, p. 85. 

In 1888 Wilson left Bryn Mawr for Wesleyan University. This was a controversial decision, because Wilson had signed a three-year contract with Bryn Mawr in1887. The contract include a condition that Wilson be provided with an assistant "as soon as practicable". Pursuant to that, Wilson named a candidate but the board of the college refused to act on it. Nevertheless when Wilson departed from the college, the board claimed he was in violation of his contract, though the matter was never litigated. Heckscher, p. 93–94. At Wesleyan, he also coached the football team and founded the debate team, which bears his name. Shortly after the birth of their third child in 1889, Ellen suffered a burn injury in the kitchen from dropping oil on her feet, making her unable to walk for several months Wilson added babysitting to his other duties at that time. Heckscher, p. 96. 

At the end of 1889 Wilson began a quiet campaign for an appointment at Princeton in political science, with the support of four trustees of the college. In February 1890 he was elected by the Princeton board to the Chair of Jurisprudence and Political Economy at a salary of $3000. Heckscher, p. 104. As he had at Bryn Mawr and at Wesleyan, he reserved time in his schedule for a six-week course in administration at Johns Hopkins for the next 7 years. Heckscher, p. 106. While there, he was one of the faculty members of the short-lived coordinate college, Evelyn College for Women. Additionally, Wilson became the first lecturer of Constitutional Law at New York Law School where he taught with Charles Evans Hughes. Walworth, v. 1; Link (1947) Representing the American Whig Society, Wilson delivered an oration at Princeton's sesquicentennial celebration (1896) entitled "Princeton in the Nation's Service". This phrase became the motto of the University, later expanded to "Princeton in the Nation's Service and in the Service of All Nations". "Beyond FitzRandolph Gates", Princeton Weekly Bulletin June 22, 1998. In this speech, he outlined his vision of the university in a democratic nation, calling on institutions of higher learning "to illuminate duty by every lesson that can be drawn out of the past". 

Wilson was annoyed that Princeton was not living up to its potential, complaining "There's a little college down in Kentucky which in 60 years has graduated more men who have acquired prominence and fame than has Princeton in her 150 years." The college he was referring to was Centre College. Link (1947) 

==Authorship in political science==

===Government systems===
Under the influence of Walter Bagehot's The English Constitution, Wilson saw the United States Constitution as pre-modern, cumbersome, and open to corruption. An admirer of Parliament, Wilson favored a parliamentary system for the United States. Writing in the early 1880s: The Politics of Woodrow Wilson, 41–48 

Wilson started Congressional Government, his first best-known political work published in 1885, as an argument for a parliamentary system. He was impressed by Grover Cleveland; Congressional Government emerged as a critical description of America's system, with frequent negative comparisons to Westminster. He said, "I am pointing out facts—diagnosing, not prescribing remedies." Wilson Congressional Government 1885, p. 205. and see Walter Lippmann's Introduction to the 1956 reprint of Congressional Government on Wilson's omission of Cabinet Government on the British model due to the emergence of Cleveland. Critics contended the book was written without the benefit of the author ever observing any operational aspect of the U.S. Congress, and supporters asserted the work was the product of the imagination of a future statesman. The book reflected the greater power of the legislature, relative to the executive, during that post-bellum period. Heckscher, p. 75–76, 83 Wilson later became a regular contributor to the Political Science Quarterly. Heckscher, p. 83. 

Wilson published his second book entitled The State in 1890 and this established him as a true political scientist. The textbook was used widely in courses throughout the country until the 1920s. In the book he argued that government should not be deemed evil and he advocated the use of government to alay social ills and advance society's welfare, verging upon a defense of socialism. Heckscher, p. 101. 

in 1889 Albert Hurt from Cambridge requested Wilson to consider contributing to a historical series, specifically covering the period from Jackson through Reconstruction. The result was his third publication entitled Division and Reunion published in 1893 and considered an outstanding contribution to American historical writing. Heckscher, p. 103. 

Wislon's fourth publication, a five volume work entitled History of the American People, was the culmination of a series of articles written for Harper's, and was published in 1902. Heckscher, p. 142. 

Wilson believed that America's intricate system of checks and balances was the cause of the problems in American governance. He said that the divided power made it impossible for voters to see who was accountable. If government behaved badly, Wilson asked: Wilson Congressional Government 1885, pp. 186–187. 

Wilson singled out the United States House of Representatives for particular criticism: Wilson Congressional Government 1885, p. 76. 

Wilson said that the Congressional committee system was fundamentally undemocratic in that committee chairs, who ruled by seniority, determined national policy although they were responsible to no one except their constituents. He believed this arrangement facilitated corruption. Wilson Congressional Government 1885, p. 132. 

When William Jennings Bryan captured the Democratic nomination from Cleveland's supporters in 1896, Wilson refused to support the ticket. Instead, he cast his ballot for John M. Palmer, the presidential candidate of the National Democratic Party, or Gold Democrats, a short-lived party that supported a gold standard, low tariffs, and limited government. David T. Beito and Linda Royster Beito, "Gold Democrats and the Decline of Classical Liberalism, 1896–1900", Independent Review 4 (Spring 2000), pp. 555–75. 

In his last scholarly work in 1908, Constitutional Government of the United States, Wilson said that the presidency "will be as big as and as influential as the man who occupies it". By the time of his presidency, Wilson hoped that Presidents could be party leaders in the same way British prime ministers were. Wilson also hoped that the parties could be reorganized along ideological, not geographic, lines. He wrote, "Eight words contain the sum of the present degradation of our political parties: No leaders, no principles; no principles, no parties." Frozen Republic, 145 

===Public administration===
Wilson also studied public administration, which he called "government in action; it is the executive, the operative, the most visible side of government, and is of course as old as government itself". Wilson 3 He believed that the study of studying public administration could enable officials to increase governmental efficiency. "The Study of Administration" in Political Science Quarterly, June 1887 

Wilson was concerned with the implementation of government. He faulted political leaders who focused on philosophical issues and the nature of government and dismissed the critical issues of government administration as mere "practical detail". He thought such attitudes represented the requirements of smaller countries and populations. By his day, he thought, "it is getting to be harder to run a constitution than to frame one." Wilson, 4 He thought it time "to straighten the paths of government, to make its business less unbusinesslike, to strengthen and purify its organization, and it to crown its dutifulness". Wilson 5 He complained that studies of administration drew principally on the history of Continental Europe and an American equivalent was required. He summarized the growth of such foreign states as Prussia, France, and England, highlighting the events that led to advances in administration.

By contrast, he thought the United States required greater compromise because of the diversity of public opinion and the difficulty of forming a majority opinion. Thus practical reform to the government is necessarily slow. Yet Wilson insisted that "administration lies outside the proper sphere of politics" Wilson, 10 and that "general laws which direct these things to be done are as obviously outside of and above administration." Wilson, 11 He likens administration to a machine that functions independent of the changing mood of its leaders. Such a line of demarcation is intended to focus responsibility for actions taken on the people or persons in charge. As Wilson put it, "public attention must be easily directed, in each case of good or bad administration, to just the man deserving of praise or blame. There is no danger in power, if only it be not irresponsible. If it be divided, dealt out in share to many, it is obscured..." Wilson, 12 Essentially, the items under the discretion of administration must be limited in scope, as to not block, nullify, obfuscate, or modify the implementation of governmental decree made by the executive branch.

==President of Princeton University==
Wilson - Princeton's president (1902)
Wilson had in the past been offered the presidency at other universities, but did not consider any of them seriously, with the exception of offers from the University of Illinois in 1892, and from the University of Virginia in 1901, both of which he declined. Heckscher, p. 110. The Princeton trustees promoted Professor Wilson to president of in June of 1902, replacing Francis Landey Patton, whom the Trustees perceived to be an inefficient administrator. Heckscher, p. 110. 

Although the school's endowment was barely $4 million, Wilson sought $2 million for a preceptorial system of teaching, $1 million for a school of science, and nearly $3 million for new buildings and salary increases. As a long-term objective, Wilson sought $3 million for a graduate school and $2.5 million for schools of jurisprudence and electrical engineering, as well as a museum of natural history. Walworth v. 1 He increased the faculty from 112 to 174, most of whom he selected himself on the basis of their records as outstanding teachers. The curriculum guidelines he developed proved important progressive innovations in the field of higher education. Walworth v. 1; Bragdon, Woodrow Wilson: The Academic Years (1967) 

To emphasize the development of expertise, Wilson instituted academic departments and a system of core requirements where students met in groups of six with preceptors, followed by two years of concentration in a selected major. He tried to raise admission standards and to replace the "gentleman's C" with serious study. Wilson aspired, as he told alumni, "to transform thoughtless boys performing tasks into thinking men". Bragdon, Woodrow Wilson: The Academic Years; Walworth v. 1; Link (1947) 

In 1906 Wilson awoke to suddenly find himself blind in the left eye. This was determined at the time to be the result of a blood clot and hypertension; modern medical opinion surmises Wilson had suffered a stroke - he later was diagnosed, as his father had been, with hardening of the arteries. He took a vacation and then was advised to resume normal activities with moderate restriction of his schedule. In the wake of this illness, Wilson began to exhibit at times some of his father's traits of impatience toward delays in his plans and intolerance toward disagreement, which would on occasion lead to errors of judgment . Heckscher, p. 156. In 1896 Wilson had perhaps prophetically described his problem in the sesquicentennial speech at Princeton "your thorough Presbyterian is not subject to the ordinary laws of life, is of too stubborn a fiber, too unrelaxing a purpose, to suffer mere inconvenience to bring defeat". Heckscher, p. 155. 
Prospect House, Wilson's home on Princeton's campus
In 1906–10, he attempted to curtail the influence of social elites by abolishing the upper-class eating clubs and moving the students into colleges, also known as quadrangles. Wilson's Quad Plan was met with fierce opposition from Princeton's alumni, most importantly Moses Taylor Pyne, the most powerful of Princeton's Trustees. Wilson held fast, saying that giving in "would be to temporize with evil". Walworth 1:109 In October 1907, due to the intensity of alumni opposition, the Board of Trustees withdrew its support for the Quad Plan and instructed Wilson to withdraw it. Bragdon, Woodrow Wilson: The Academic Years, 326–327. Wilson also made biblical studies a scholarly pursuit, appointed the first Jew and the first Roman Catholic to the faculty and helped liberate the board from domination by conservative Presbyterians. Heckscher, p. 138. 

Late in his tenure, Wilson confronted Andrew Fleming West, Dean of the graduate school, and West's ally former President Grover Cleveland, who was a trustee. Wilson wanted to integrate the proposed graduate building into the same area with the undergraduate colleges. West wanted them to remain separate. When West obtained outside funding, the trustees rejected Wilson's plan for colleges in 1908, and endorsed West's alternative in 1909. The national press covered the confrontation as a battle of the elites represented by West versus democracy represented by Wilson. Around 1910, Wilson engaged in long meetings in Bermuda with socialite Mary Hulbert Peck. Historians are unsure whether there was an affair. There is no evidence, but Wilson did send very personal letters, and ugly rumors were circulated by his political enemies in 1912. Cooper (2009) pp. 99–101. It was this confrontation that led to Wilson's decision to leave Princeton for politics. He later commented that politics was less brutal than university administration. Cooper, John Milton. "Woodrow Wilson: A Biography". p. 107 Wilson was elected president of the American Political Science Association in 1910, but soon decided to leave his Princeton post and enter New Jersey state politics. Walworth, v 1 ch 6, 7, 8 Wilson left academe with an outstanding reputation as educator and reformer, having set Princeton on the path to becoming one of America's great universities. Cooper, Woodrow Wilson: A Biography, p. 119 

==Governor of New Jersey==
In 1910, Wilson ran for Governor of New Jersey against the Republican candidate Vivian M. Lewis, the State Commissioner of Banking and Insurance. Wilson's campaign focused on his independence from machine politics, and he promised that if elected he would not be beholden to party bosses. Wilson soundly defeated Lewis in the general election by a margin of more than 49,000 votes, although Republican William Howard Taft had carried New Jersey in the 1908 presidential election by more than 80,000 votes. Biography of Woodrow Wilson (PDF), New Jersey State Library. Historian Edmund Morris called Wilson in the Governor's race a "dark horse" and attributed his and others' success against the Taft Republicans in 1910 in part to the emergent national progressive message enunciated by Theodore Roosevelt in his post-presidency. Morris, Edmund, "The Tea Party Last Time, Op-ed, The New York Times, October 31, 2010 (November 1, 2010 p. A33 NY ed.). Retrieved November 1, 2010. 

In the 1910 election, the Democrats also took control of the General Assembly. The State Senate, however, remained in Republican control by a slim margin. After taking office, Wilson set in place his reformist agenda, ignoring the demands of party machinery. While governor, in a period spanning six months, Wilson established state primaries. This all but took the party bosses out of the presidential election process in the state. He also revamped the public utility commission and introduced worker's compensation. 

==Election of 1912==

Wilson's popularity as governor and his status in the national media gave impetus to his presidential campaign in 1912. He chose Indiana Governor Thomas R. Marshall as his running mate Cooper (2009), 163–68 and selected William Frank McCombs, a New York lawyer and a friend from college days, to manage his campaign. He also enjoyed the support of Colonel House, a leading Texas businessman and Democratic power-broker now based in New York.

With Wilson the first Southerner to have a serious chance at the White House since 1848, Southern Democrats strongly supported Wilson's campaign for the nomination in 1912. Arthur S. Link, "Woodrow Wilson: The American as Southerner," Journal of Southern History (1970) 36#1 pp. 3-17 in JSTOR Much of Wilson's support came from the South, especially from young progressives in that region, including intellectuals, editors and lawyers. Wilson managed to maneuver through the complexities of local politics. For example, in Tennessee the Democratic Party was divided on the issue of prohibition. Wilson was progressive and sober, but not dry, and appealed to both sides. They united behind him to win the presidential election in the state, but divided over state politics and lost the gubernatorial election. Arthur S. Link, "Democratic Politics and the Presidential Campaign of 1912 in Tennessee", East Tennessee Historical Society's Publications 1979 51: 114–137 

The convention deadlocked for more than 40 ballots as no candidate could reach the two-thirds vote required to win the nomination. A leading contender was House Speaker Champ Clark, a prominent progressive strongest in the border states. Other contenders were Governor Judson Harmon of Ohio, and Representative Oscar Underwood of Alabama. They lacked Wilson's charisma and dynamism. Publisher William Randolph Hearst, a leader of the left wing of the party, supported Clark. William Jennings Bryan, the nominee in 1896, 1900 and 1908, played a critical role in opposition to any candidate who had the support of "the financiers of Wall Street". He finally announced for Wilson, who won on the 46th ballot. Arthur S. Link, "The Baltimore Convention of 1912", American Historical Review 1945 50(4): 691–713 in JSTOR 

In his presidential campaign, Wilson promoted the "New Freedom", emphasizing limited federal government and opposition to monopoly powers, often after consultation with his chief advisor Louis D. Brandeis. In the contest for the Republican nomination, President William Howard Taft defeated former president Theodore Roosevelt, who ran as a Bull Moose Party candidate, which assisted in Wilson's success in the electoral college. Wilson appealed to African Americans and promised to work for them, gaining some support among them in the North at the expense of the Republicans. In the South, they were disenfranchised. Wilson took 41.8% of the popular vote and won 435 electoral votes from 40 states. Lewis L. Gould, Four Hats in the Ring: The 1912 Election and the Birth of Modern American Politics (2008), p. ?? It is not clear if Roosevelt cost fellow Republican Taft, or fellow progressive Wilson more support. Cooper, John Milton. "Woodrow Wilson: A Biography". p. 187 

According to Richard Valelly, Wilson won an Electoral College bonus because of the previous disenfranchisement of blacks, and won the 1912 and 1916 elections. "His election altered race relations" as he "authorized a truly thorough program of segregating the federal civil service." 

==Presidency, 1913–1921==

===First term, 1913–1917===
Woodrow Wilson sworn in as the 28th President of the United States March 4, 1913
Wilson was the first Southerner elected to the White House since 1869 and worked closely with Southern Democratic Party leaders. In Wilson's first month in office, at the request of Albert S. Burleson, his Postmaster General, and the Secretary of Treasury, the president agreed to segregate the mail service and other government agencies. The government had been integrated since the Reconstruction era, and people were hired on a merit system for most jobs. His decision adversely affected the government and closed off opportunities off African Americans.

Since 1856, he and Grover Cleveland were the only Democrats elected president, so Wilson felt a need to appoint Democrats to all cabinet posts and federal patronage positions. Arthur S. Link, "Woodrow Wilson: The American as Southerner", Journal of Southern History, Vol. 36, No. 1 (1970), pp. 3–17 in JSTOR 

In resolving economic policy issues, Wilson had to manage the conflict between two wings of his party: the agrarian wing led by Bryan and the pro-business wing. With large Democratic majorities in Congress and a healthy economy, he promptly seized the opportunity to implement his agenda. Link (1972) Wilson experienced early success by implementing his "New Freedom" pledges of antitrust modification, tariff revision, and reform in banking and currency matters. Clements, Presidency ch. 3 He held the first modern presidential press conference, on March 15, 1913, in which reporters were allowed to ask him questions. In 1913, he also became the first president to deliver the State of the Union address in person since 1801 when Thomas Jefferson discontinued this practice.

Wilson's first wife Ellen died on August 6, 1914, casting him into a deep depression. In 1915, he met Edith Galt. They married later that year on December 18.

====Federal Reserve 1913====
Wilson addressing the U.S. Congress, April 8, 1913
Wilson secured passage of the Federal Reserve Act in late 1913. He had tried to find a middle ground between conservative Republicans, led by Senator Nelson W. Aldrich, and the powerful left wing of the Democratic party, led by William Jennings Bryan, who strenuously denounced private banks and Wall Street. The latter group wanted a government-owned central bank that could print paper money as Congress required. The compromise, based on the Aldrich Plan but sponsored by Democratic Congressmen Carter Glass and Robert Owen, allowed the private banks to control the 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks, but appeased the agrarians by placing controlling interest in the System in a central board appointed by the president with Senate approval. Moreover, Wilson convinced Bryan's supporters that because Federal Reserve notes were obligations of the government, the plan met their demands for an elastic currency. Having 12 regional banks was meant to weaken the influence of the powerful New York banks, a key demand of Bryan's allies in the South and West. This decentralization was a key factor in winning Glass' support. Link (1954) pp. 43–53 The final plan passed in December 1913. Some bankers felt it gave too much control to Washington, and some reformers felt it allowed bankers to maintain too much power. Several Congressmen claimed that New York bankers feigned their disapproval. Clements, Presidency, pp. 40–44. 

Wilson named Paul Warburg and other prominent bankers to direct the new system. While power was supposed to be decentralized, the New York branch dominated the Fed as the "first among equals". The new system began operations in 1915 and played a major role in financing the Allied and American war effort. Link, Wilson: The New Freedom (1956) pp. 199–240 The strengthening of the Federal Reserve was later a major accomplishment of the New Deal. Cooper, John Milton. "Woodrow Wilson: A Biography". p. 195 

====Economic legislation====
The Democrats lowered tariffs with the Underwood Tariff in 1913, though its effects were soon overwhelmed by the changes in trade caused by World War I. Arthur S. Link, '"Wilson: The New Freedom (1956) pp. 177–98 Wilson proved especially effective in mobilizing public opinion behind tariff changes by denouncing corporate lobbyists, addressing Congress in person in highly dramatic fashion, and staging an elaborate ceremony when he signed the bill into law. Vincent W. Howard, "Woodrow Wilson, The Press, and Presidential Leadership: Another Look at the Passage of the Underwood Tariff, 1913," CR: The Centennial Review, 1980, Vol. 24 Issue 2, pp. 167–184 The revenue lost by a lower tariff was replaced by a new federal income tax, authorized by the 16th Amendment. Wilson managed to bring all sides together on the issues of money and banking by the creation in 1913 of the Federal Reserve System, a complex business-government partnership that to this day dominates the financial world. Link, '"Wilson: The New Freedom pp. 199–240 With the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, Wilson helped end the long battles over the trusts. Link, '"Wilson: The New Freedom pp. 417–44 

With the President reaching out to new constituencies, a series of programs were targeted at farmers. The Smith–Lever Act of 1914 created the modern system of agricultural extension agents sponsored by the state agricultural colleges. The agents taught new techniques to farmers. The 1916 Federal Farm Loan Act provided for issuance of low-cost long-term mortgages to farmers. Clements, Presidency, ch 4. 

Child labor was curtailed by the Keating–Owen Act of 1916, but the U.S. Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional in 1918. No major child labor prohibition would take effect until the 1930s. H.D. Hindman Child labor: an American history (2002) 

In the summer of 1916, the railroad brotherhoods threatened to shut down the national transportation system. Wilson tried to bring labor and management together, but when management refused, he had Congress pass the Adamson Act in September 1916, avoiding the strike by imposing an 8-hour workday in the industry (at the same pay as before). Passage of this act helped Wilson gain union support for his reelection; the act was approved by the Supreme Court. Much of this agenda would later serve as an example or a basis of support for the New Deal. 

Wilson uses tariff, currency and anti-trust laws to prime the pump and get the economy working in a 1913 political cartoon

====Antitrust====
Wilson broke with the big lawsuit tradition of his predecessors Taft and Roosevelt as Trustbusters, finding a new approach to encouraging competition through the Federal Trade Commission, which stopped perceived unfair trade practices. In addition, he pushed through Congress the Clayton Antitrust Act making certain business practices illegal (such as price discrimination, agreements prohibiting retailers from handling other companies' products, and directorates and agreements to control other companies). The power of this legislation was greater than that of previous anti-trust laws because individual officers of corporations could be held responsible if their companies violated the laws. More importantly, the new laws set out clear guidelines that corporations could follow, a dramatic improvement over the previous uncertainties. This law was considered the "Magna Carta" of labor by Samuel Gompers because it ended union liability antitrust laws. In 1916, under threat of a national railroad strike, Wilson approved legislation that increased wages and cut working hours of railroad employees; there was no strike. 

====War policy – World War I====

Wilson spent 1914 through to the beginning of 1917 trying to keep America out of the war in Europe. He offered to be a mediator, but neither the Allies nor the Central Powers took his requests seriously. Republicans, led by Theodore Roosevelt, strongly criticized Wilson's refusal to build up the U.S. Army in anticipation of the threat of war. Wilson won the support of the peace element (especially women and churches) by arguing that an army buildup would provoke war. Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan, whose pacifist recommendations were ignored by Wilson, resigned in 1915. Clements, Presidency, ch. 7. 

On December 18, 1916, Wilson unsuccessfully offered to mediate peace. As a preliminary, he asked both sides to state their minimum terms necessary for future security. The Central Powers replied that victory was certain, and the Allies required the dismemberment of their enemies' empires. No desire for peace or common ground existed, and the offer lapsed. Cooper, Woodrow Wilson (2009) pp. 362–76 

While German submarines were killing sailors and civilian passengers, Wilson demanded that Germany stop, but he kept the U.S. out of the war. Britain had declared a blockade of Germany to prevent neutral ships from carrying contraband goods to Germany. Wilson protested some British violation of neutral rights, where no one was killed. His protests were mild, and the British knew America would not see it as a casus belli. 

===Election of 1916===

Wilson accepts the Democratic Party nomination, 1916
Renominated without opposition, Wilson used as a major campaign slogan "He kept us out of war", referring to his avoiding open conflict with Germany or Mexico while maintaining a firm national policy. Wilson, however, never promised to keep out of war regardless of provocation. In his acceptance speech on September 2, 1916, Wilson pointedly warned Germany that submarine warfare that took American lives would not be tolerated, saying "The nation that violates these essential rights must expect to be checked and called to account by direct challenge and resistance. It at once makes the quarrel in part our own." 

During the 1916 election campaign, while drafting the Democratic Party platform, Wilson received a suggestion that helped give the document a sharper political focus. Senator Owen of Oklahoma urged Wilson to take ideas from the Progressive Party platform of 1912 “as a means of attaching to our party progressive Republicans who are in sympathy with us in so large a degree.” Wilson liked this suggestion and asked Owen to specify the 1912 Progressive ideas to include. In response, Owen highlighted federal legislation to promote workers’ health and safety, prohibit child labour, provide unemployment compensation, require an eight-hour day and six-day workweek, and establish minimum wages and maximum hours. Wilson, in turn, included in his draft platform a plank that called for all work performed by and for the federal government to provide a minimum wage, an eight-hour day and six-day workweek, health and safety measures, the prohibition of child labour, and (his own additions) safeguards for female workers and a retirement program. Cooper, John Milton Jr. Woodrow Wilson p 335 
Wilson opens the season at Griffith Stadium, April 20, 1916

"Colonel" House, one of Wilson's closest advisors during his first term, played an important role in Wilson re-election campaign. He declined any public role, but was Wilson's top campaign advisor. "He planned its structure; set its tone; guided its finance; chose speakers, tactics, and strategy; and, not least, handled the campaign's greatest asset and greatest potential liability: its brilliant but temperamental candidate." 

Wilson narrowly won the election, defeating Republican candidate Charles Evans Hughes. As governor of New York from 1907 to 1910, Hughes had a progressive record strikingly similar to Wilson's as governor of New Jersey. Theodore Roosevelt would comment that the only thing different between Hughes and Wilson was a shave. However, Hughes had to try to hold together a coalition of conservative Taft supporters and progressive Roosevelt partisans and so his campaign never seemed to take a definite form. Wilson ran on his record and ignored Hughes, reserving his attacks for Roosevelt. When asked why he did not attack Hughes directly, Wilson told a friend, "Never murder a man who is committing suicide." The American Presidency Project Wilson quote 

The result was exceptionally close and the outcome was in doubt for several days. The vote came down to several close states. Wilson won California by 3,773 votes out of almost a million votes cast and New Hampshire by 54 votes. Hughes won Minnesota by 393 votes out of over 358,000. In the final count, Wilson had 277 electoral votes vs. Hughes's 254. Wilson was able to win by picking up many votes that had gone to Teddy Roosevelt or Eugene V. Debs in 1912. William M. Leary, Jr. "Woodrow Wilson, Irish Americans, and the Election of 1916", The Journal of American History, Vol. 54, No. 1. (June 1967), pp. 57–72. in JSTOR 

===Second term, 1917–1921===

====Decision for war, 1917====
The U.S. had made a declaration of neutrality in 1914. Wilson warned citizens not to take sides in the war for fear of endangering wider U.S. policy. In his address to Congress in 1914, Wilson stated, "Such divisions amongst us would be fatal to our peace of mind and might seriously stand in the way of the proper performance of our duty as the one great nation at peace, the one people holding itself ready to play a part of impartial mediation and speak the counsels of peace and accommodation, not as a partisan, but as a friend." "Primary Documents: U.S. Declaration of Neutrality, August 19, 1914", accessed January 7, 2002. 

The U.S. maintained neutrality despite increasing pressure placed on Wilson after the sinking of the British passenger liner RMS Lusitania with arms and American citizens on board. Wilson found it increasingly difficult to maintain U.S. neutrality after Germany, despite its promises in the Arabic pledge and the Sussex pledge, initiated a program of unrestricted submarine warfare early in 1917 that threatened U.S. commercial shipping. Following the revelation of the Zimmermann Telegram, Germany's attempt to enlist Mexico as an ally against the U.S., Wilson took America into World War I to make "the world safe for democracy." The U.S. did not sign a formal alliance with the United Kingdom or France but operated as an "associated" power. The U.S. raised a massive army through conscription and Wilson gave command to General John J. Pershing, allowing Pershing a free hand as to tactics, strategy and even diplomacy. Edward M. Coffman, The War to End All Wars (1968) ch. 3 

Wilson had decided by then that the war had become a real threat to humanity. Unless the U.S. threw its weight into the war, as he stated in his declaration of war speech on April 2, 1917, western civilization itself could be destroyed. His statement announcing a "war to end war" meant that he wanted to build a basis for peace that would prevent future catastrophic wars and needless death and destruction. This provided the basis of Wilson's Fourteen Points, which were intended to resolve territorial disputes, ensure free trade and commerce, and establish a peacemaking organization. Included in these fourteen points was the proposal for the League of Nations. Clements, Presidency, ch 7–8 

====War Message====
President Wilson delivering his war message before Congress. April 2, 1917.
Woodrow Wilson delivered his War Message to Congress on the evening of April 2, 1917. Introduced to great applause, he remained intense and almost motionless for the entire speech, only raising one arm as his only bodily movement. Baker, Ray Stannard, Woodrow Wilson Life and Letters (Garden City, NY, 1937) 

Wilson announced that his previous position of "armed neutrality" was no longer tenable now that the Imperial German Government had announced that it would use its submarines to sink any vessel approaching the ports of Great Britain, Ireland or any of the Western Coasts of Europe. He advised Congress to declare that the recent course of action taken by the Imperial German Government constituted an act of war. He proposed that the United States enter the war to "vindicate principles of peace and justice in the life of the world as against selfish and autocratic power". He also charged that Germany had "filled our unsuspecting communities and even our offices of government with spies and set criminal intrigues everywhere afoot against our national unity of counsel, our peace within and without our industries and our commerce". Furthermore, the United States had intercepted a telegram sent to the German ambassador in Mexico City that evidenced Germany's attempt to instigate a Mexican attack upon the U.S. The German government, Wilson said, "means to stir up enemies against us at our very doors". He then warned that "if there should be disloyalty, it will be dealt with a firm hand of repression." Cooper, John Milton, Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson: Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace, Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, ISBN 978-0-8018-9074-1 (2008), p. 190: Wilson insisted that those who refused to support the nation in time of war surrendered their civil liberties. Wilson closed with the statement that the world must be again safe for democracy. 

With 50 Representatives and 6 Senators in opposition, the declaration of war by the United States against Germany was passed by the Congress on April 4, 1917, and was approved by the President on April 6, 1917.

====The Fourteen Points====

Image of Wilson created by 21,000 soldiers at Camp Sherman, Chillicothe, Ohio, 1918

In a speech to Congress on January 8, 1918, Wilson articulated America's war aims. It was the clearest expression of intention made by any of the belligerent nations. The speech, authored principally by Walter Lippmann, expressed Wilson's progressive domestic policies into comparably idealistic equivalents for the international arena: self-determination, open agreements, international cooperation. Promptly dubbed the Fourteen Points, Wilson attempted to make them the basis for the treaty that would mark the end of the war. They ranged from the most generic principles like the prohibition of secret treaties to such detailed outcomes as the creation of an independent Poland with access to the sea. 

====Home front====

To counter opposition to the war at home, Wilson pushed through Congress the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918 to suppress anti-British, pro-German, or anti-war opinions. While he welcomed socialists who supported the war, he pushed at the same time to arrest and deport foreign-born radicals. Avrich, Paul, Sacco and Vanzetti: The Anarchist Background, Princeton: Princeton University Press, ISBN 0-691-02604-1, ISBN 978-0-691-02604-6 (1991), pp. 93–94, 124, 127, 130–133 Citing the Espionage Act, the U.S. Post Office, following the instructions of the Justice Department, refused to carry any written materials that could be deemed critical of the U.S. war effort. Some sixty newspapers judged to have revolutionary or antiwar content were deprived of their second-class mailing rights and effectively banned from the U.S. mails. Clements, Presidency ch 8 Mere criticism of the Wilson administration and its war policy became grounds for arrest and imprisonment. A Jewish immigrant from Germany, Robert Goldstein, was sentenced to ten years in prison for producing The Spirit of '76, a film that portrayed the British, now an ally, in an unfavorable light. Loewen, James W., Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American History Textbook Got Wrong, Touchstone Books (1995), pp. 20, 22, 24 

Wilson's domestic economic policies were strongly pro-labor, but this favorable treatment was extended to only those unions that supported the U.S. war effort, such as the American Federation of Labor (AFL). Gompers Pledges Labor's Support for WWI, History Channel Online, retrieved July 21, 2011 Antiwar groups, anarchists, communists, Industrial Workers of the World members, and other radical labor movements were regularly targeted by agents of the Department of Justice; many of their leaders were arrested on grounds of incitement to violence, espionage, or sedition. McElroy, Wendy, World War I and the Suppression of Dissent, Parts 1 and 2, Freedom Daily, The Future of Freedom Foundation (April 2002), retrieved July 20, 2011 By 1918, the ranks of those arrested included Eugene Debs, the mild-mannered Socialist Party leader and labor activist, after he gave a speech opposing the war. Cooper, John Milton, Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson: Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press, ISBN 978-0-8018-9074-1 (2008), pp. 201, 209 Debs' opposition to the Wilson administration and the war earned the undying enmity of President Wilson, who later called Debs a "traitor to his country". Many recent foreign immigrants, resident aliens who opposed America's participation in World War I, were eventually deported to Soviet Russia or other nations under the sweeping powers granted in the Immigration Act of 1918, which had actually been drafted by Wilson administration officials at the Department of Justice and the Bureau of Immigration. Even after the war ended in November 1918, the Wilson administration's attempts to silence radical political opponents continued, culminating in the Palmer Raids, a mass arrest and roundup of some 10,000 anarchists and labor activists, raids led by Wilson's Attorney General, A. Mitchell Palmer. Norton, Mary Beth, A People and a Nation: A History of the United States Since 1865: Vol 2, Wadsworth Publishing, ISBN 0-618-39177-0, ISBN 978-0-618-39177-6 (2006), p. 681 The investigations and prosecutions of antiwar activists by the Department of Justice were heavily criticized by prominent lawyers and law professors of the day, including Felix Frankfurter and Roscoe Pound. On May 28, 1920, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) published A Report of the Illegal Practices of the United States Department of Justice which documented the activities of the Justice Department under Attorney Generals Thomas Watt Gregory and A. Mitchell Palmer in arresting suspected radicals, illegal entrapment by agent provocateurs, and unlawful incommunicado detention. The report was signed by prominent lawyers and law professors, including Felix Frankfurter, Roscoe Pound and Ernst Freund. The Palmer Raids were eventually stymied in June 1920 by Massachusetts District Court Judge George Anderson, who ordered the discharge of 17 arrested aliens and publicly denounced the Department of Justice's actions. Murray, Robert K., Red Scare: A Study in National Hysteria, 1919–1920, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, ISBN 0-8166-5833-1, ISBN 978-0-8166-5833-6 (1955), pp. 250–251 Post, Louis F., The Deportations Delirium of Nineteen-twenty: A Personal Narrative of an Historic Official Experience , New York: C.H. Kerr & Co., ISBN 0-306-71882-0, ISBN 1-4102-0553-3 (1923), reissued Gale, Making of Modern Law, ISBN 1-240-11938-0, ISBN 978-1-240-11938-7 (2010), p. 97 He wrote that "a mob is a mob, whether made up of Government officials acting under instructions from the Department of Justice, or of criminals and loafers and the vicious classes." Judge Anderson's decision effectively prevented any renewal of the raids. Of the 10,000 persons arrested in the Palmer raids, 3,500 were held in detention, of whom 556 were eventually deported to other countries. Avakov, Aleksandr Vladimirovich, Plato's Dreams Realized: Surveillance and Citizen Rights from KGB to FBI, Algora Publishing, ISBN 0-87586-495-3, ISBN 978-0-87586-495-2 (2007), p. 36 

Liberty Loan drive in front of City Hall, New Orleans. On City Hall is a banner reading "Food will win the war - don't waste it".
Women workers in ordnance shops, Pennsylvania, 1918

In October 1917, President Wilson and Congress created the Office of the Alien Property Custodian; and A. Mitchell Palmer, prior to being appointed Attorney General, was appointed by Wilson to head this agency. On July 15, 1918, President Wilson gave Palmer the power to sell enemy-owned property worth less than $10,000 privately without public auction. Palmer's sale manager, Joseph Guffy, was later indicted on 12 counts for embezzlement of the sale funds, although Guffy was never brought to trial. In the Philippines, transactions of German property sales were rigged for sale to private friends of the local manager. Although Palmer revoked the sales under President Wilson's support, he appointed a new agent who then resold the properties to the original purchasers. In December 1918, Palmer was under suspicion that the sale of Bosch Magneto Company had been rigged, when the firm was sold to Palmer's friend who owned a truck manufacturing business. According to his biographer, Stanley Coben, Palmer lied before the Senate committee about this transaction during his nomination hearings for the appointment of Attorney General. Palmer also was criticized in 1920 for having sold 5,000 German chemical patents too cheaply. Although President Wilson may have been unaware of any illicit transactions, he warned Palmer in a letter, dated September 4, 1918, to use his power sparingly when no other sale was possible. 

During the war, Wilson worked closely with Samuel Gompers and the AFL, the railroad brotherhoods, and other 'moderate' unions, which saw enormous growth in membership and wages during Wilson's administration. As there was no rationing, consumer prices soared. As income taxes increased, white-collar workers suffered. Despite this, appeals to buy war bonds were highly successful. The purchase of wartime bonds had the result of shifting the cost of the war to the affluent 1920s. 

Wilson set up the first western propaganda office, the United States Committee on Public Information, headed by George Creel (thus its popular name, Creel Commission), which filled the country with patriotic anti-German appeals and conducted various forms of censorship. Records of the Committee on Public Information from the National Archives In 1917, Congress authorized ex-President Theodore Roosevelt to raise four divisions of volunteers to fight in France—Roosevelt's World War I volunteers; Wilson refused to accept this offer from his political enemy. Other areas of the war effort were incorporated into the government along with propaganda. The War Industries Board headed by Bernard Baruch set war goals and policies for American factories. Future President Herbert Hoover was appointed to head the Food Administration which encouraged Americans to participate in "Meatless Mondays" and "Wheatless Wednesdays" to conserve food for the troops overseas. The Federal Fuel Administration run by Henry Garfield introduced daylight saving time and rationed fuel supplies such as coal and oil to keep the U.S. military supplied. These and many other boards and administrations were headed by businessmen recruited by Wilson for a-dollar-a-day salary to make the government more efficient in the war effort. 

In an effort at reform and to shake up his Mobilization program, Wilson removed the chief of the Army Signal Corps and the chairman of the Aircraft Production Board on April 18, 1918. Leuchtenburg (1974), pp. 255–256 On May 16, the President launched an investigation, headed by Republican Charles Evans Hughes, into the War Department and the Council of Defense. Leuchtenburg (1974), p. 256 The Hughes report released on October 31 found no major corruption violations or theft in Wilson's Mobilization program, although the report found incompetence in the aircraft program. Leuchtenburg (1974), pp. 256–257; U.S. Department of Justice (1918), Report on the Aircraft Inquiry, Washington D.C.; Pusey, Hughes, I, pp. 378–382 

====Other foreign affairs====
President and Mrs Woodrow Wilson arriving in a horse-drawn carriage at the Mansion House, London in 1918
In anticipation of the opening of the Panama Canal, Britain protested that U.S. plans to exempt from tolls all U.S. vessels traveling between the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of the U.S. in accordance with the Panama Canal Act of 1912, violated the Hay–Pauncefote Treaty. On March 5, 1914, Wilson sent a message to Congress strongly urging the repeal of the exemption. He regarded the exemption as a plain breach of the Treaty and proposed a "voluntary withdrawal from a position everywhere questioned and misunderstood." In spite of strong opposition within his own party, he forced Democrats in Congress to support a repeal of the exemption. John Milton Cooper, Jr., Woodrow Wilson: A Biography (NY, 2009), 249–50 

Wilson frequently intervened in Latin American affairs, saying in 1913: "I am going to teach the South American republics to elect good men." Paul Horgan, Great River: the Rio Grande in North American History (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1984), 913 These interventions included Mexico in 1914, Haiti, Dominican Republic in 1916, Cuba in 1917, and Panama in 1918. The U.S. maintained troops in Nicaragua throughout the Wilson administration and used them to select the president of Nicaragua and then to force Nicaragua to pass the Bryan-Chamorro Treaty. American troops in Haiti, under the command of the federal government, forced the Haitian legislature to choose as Haitian president the candidate Wilson selected. American troops occupied Haiti between 1915 and 1934. Clements, Presidency 103–6 Wilson ordered the military occupation of the Dominican Republic shortly after the resignation of its President Juan Isidro Jimenes Pereyra in 1916. The U.S. military worked in concert with wealthy Dominican landowners to suppress the gavilleros, a campesino guerrilla force fighting the occupation. The occupation lasted until 1924, and was notorious for its brutality against those in the resistance. Wilson also negotiated with Colombia a treaty in which the U.S. apologized for its role in the Panama Revolution of 1903–1904. Cooper, Woodrow Wilson (2009), 381 

American troops in Vladivostok as part of the American Expeditionary Force Siberia, August 1918
After Russia left World War I following the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, the Allies sent troops there to prevent a German or Bolshevik takeover of allied-provided weapons, munitions and other supplies previously shipped as aid to the pre-revolutionary government. George F. Kennan, Russia Leaves the War, p. 472, et passim. 1956, repr. 1989, ISBN 0-691-00841-8. Wilson sent armed forces to assist the withdrawal of Czechoslovak Legions along the Trans-Siberian Railway, and to hold key port cities at Arkangel and Vladivostok. Though not sent to engage the Bolsheviks, the U.S. forces engaged in several armed conflicts against forces of the new Russian government. Revolutionaries in Russia resented the American intrusion. As Robert Maddox puts it, "The immediate effect of the intervention was to prolong a bloody civil war, thereby costing thousands of additional lives and wreaking enormous destruction on an already battered society." Robert J. Maddox, The Unknown War with Russia (San Rafael, CA: Presidio Press, 1977), 137. Wilson withdrew most of the soldiers on April 1, 1920, though some remained until as late as 1922.

In 1919, Wilson guided American foreign policy to "acquiesce" in the Balfour Declaration without supporting Zionism in an official way. Wilson expressed sympathy for the plight of Jews, especially in Poland and in France. Walworth (1986) 473–83, esp. p. 481; Melvin I. Urofsky, American Zionism from Herzl to the Holocaust, (1995) ch. 6; Frank W. Brecher, Reluctant Ally: United States Foreign Policy toward the Jews from Wilson to Roosevelt. (1991) ch 1–4. 

In May 1920, Wilson finally sent a long-deferred proposal to Congress to have the U.S. accept a mandate from the League of Nations to take over Armenia. Peter Balakian (2003). The Burning Tigris: The Armenian Genocide and America's Response. New York: HarperCollins. Bailey notes that the scheme was strongly opposed by American public opinion, Bailey, Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal (1945) pp. 295–96. while Richard G. Hovannisian states that Wilson "made all the wrong arguments" for the mandate and focused less on the immediate policy than on how history would judge his actions: " wished to place it clearly on the record that the abandonment of Armenia was not his doing." The resolution won the votes of only 23 senators.

====Peace Conference 1919====

The “Big Four” at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, following the end of World War I.
After World War I, Wilson participated in negotiations with the stated aim of assuring statehood for formerly oppressed nations and an equitable peace. On January 8, 1918, Wilson made his famous Fourteen Points address, introducing the idea of a League of Nations, an organization with a stated goal of helping to preserve territorial integrity and political independence among large and small nations alike. Cooper, Woodrow Wilson, pp. 420–453 

Wilson intended the Fourteen Points as a means toward ending the war and achieving an equitable peace for all the nations. He spent six months in Paris for the Peace Conference (making him the first U.S. president to travel to Europe while in office). He was not well-regarded at the Conference. As John Maynard Keynes observed: "He not only had no proposals in detail, but he was in many respects, perhaps inevitably, ill-informed as to European conditions. And not only was he ill-informed—that was true of Mr. Lloyd George also—but his mind was slow and unadaptable...There can seldom have been a statesman of the first rank more incompetent than the President in the agilities of the council chamber." John Maynard Keynes, The Economic Consequences of the Peace (London: MacMillan, 1923),available online He worked tirelessly to promote his plan. The charter of the proposed League of Nations was incorporated into the conference's Treaty of Versailles. Arnold M. Rice, John A. Krout, United States History From 1865, (HarperCollins, 1991), p. 180. Japan proposed that the Covenant include a racial equality clause. Wilson was indifferent to the issue, but acceded to strong opposition from Australia and Britain. After the conference, Wilson said that "at last the world knows America as the savior of the world!" President Woodrow Wilson speaking on the League of Nations to a luncheon audience in Portland OR. 66th Cong., 1st sess. Senate Documents: Addresses of President Wilson (May–November 1919), vol.11, no. 120, p. 206. 

When Wilson traveled to Europe to settle the peace terms, he visited Pope Benedict XV in Rome, making Wilson the first American President to visit the Pope while in office. 

Wilson returning from the Versailles Peace Conference, 1919.
For his peace-making efforts, Wilson was awarded the 1919 Nobel Peace Prize. 

====Treaty fight, 1919====
The next question was whether the United States Senate would approve the treaty by the required two-thirds vote. Public opinion was mixed, with intense opposition from most Republicans, from Germans, and from Irish Catholic Democrats. In numerous meetings with Senators in Washington he discovered the opposition had hardened and the Treaty probably lacked the two-thirds vote needed for passage. Despite his weakened physical condition Wilson decided to barnstorm the Western states, scheduling 29 major speeches and many short ones to rally support. A. Scott Berg, Wilson (2013), pp. 619–34 

Wilson had downplayed the theme of Germany as guilty in starting the war in 1917 by calling for "peace without victory", but he took an increasingly hard stand at Paris and rejected advice to soften the Treaty. Marc Trachtenberg, "Versailles after Sixty Years," Journal of Contemporary History (1982) 17#3 pp. 487–506 esp p. 490 in JSTOR In his public campaign in summer 1919 to rally American support, he repeatedly stressed Germany's guilt, as in his speech on September 4, 1919, where he said the Treaty: 
:"Seeks to punish one of the greatest wrongs ever done in history, the wrong which Germany sought to do to the world and to civilization; and there ought to be no weak purpose with regard to the application of the punishment. She attempted an intolerable thing,and she must be made to pay for the attempt." 

Wilson had a series of debilitating strokes and had to cancel his trip on September 26, 1919. He became an invalid in the White House, closely monitored or controlled by his wife, who pretended that all was well and never told Wilson how serious his condition was. Berg, Wilson, pp. 635-43 Republicans under Senator Lodge controlled both houses of Congress after the 1918 elections. The key point of disagreement was whether the League would diminish the power of Congress to declare war.

The Senate was divided into a crazy quilt of positions on the Versailles question. Cooper, Woodrow Wilson, 507–560 It proved possible to build a majority coalition, but impossible to build the two-thirds coalition needed to pass a treaty. Thomas A. Bailey, Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal (1945) One block of Democrats strongly supported the Versailles Treaty. A second group of Democrats supported the Treaty but followed Wilson in opposing any amendments or reservations. The largest bloc, led by Senator Lodge, comprised a majority of the Republicans. They wanted a treaty with reservations, especially on Article X, which involved the power of the League of Nations to make war without a vote by the United States Congress. Finally, a bipartisan group of 13 "irreconcilables" opposed a treaty in any form. Ralph A. Stone (1970). The Irreconcilables: The Fight Against the League of Nations. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. The closest the Treaty came to passage in mid-November 1919 when Lodge and his Republicans formed a coalition with the pro-Treaty Democrats, and were close to a two-thirds majority for a Treaty with reservations, but Wilson rejected this compromise and enough Democrats followed his lead to end permanently the chances for ratification. Cooper and Bailey suggest that Wilson's stroke on September 25, 1919, had so altered his personality that he was unable to negotiate effectively with Lodge. Cooper says the psychological effects of a stroke were profound: "Wilson's emotions were unbalanced, and his judgment was warped....Worse, his denial of illness and limitations was starting to border on delusion." Cooper, Woodrow Wilson, 544, 557–560; Bailey calls Wilson's rejection, "The Supreme Infanticide," Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal (1945) p. 271. 

During this period, Wilson became less trustful of the press and stopped holding press conferences for them, preferring to use his propaganda unit, the Committee for Public Information, instead. A poll of historians in 2006 cited Wilson's failure to compromise with the Republicans on U.S. entry into the League as one of the 10 largest errors on the part of an American president. 

====Post war: 1919–1920====
Wilson's administration did not plan for the process of demobilization at the war's end. Though some advisers tried to engage the President's attention to what they called "reconstruction", his tepid support for a federal commission evaporated with the election of 1918. Republican gains in the Senate meant that his opposition would have to consent to the appointment of commission members. Instead, Wilson favored the prompt dismantling of wartime boards and regulatory agencies. David M. Kennedy, Over Here: The First World War and American Society (2004) pp. 249–50 

Demobilization proved chaotic and violent. Four million soldiers were sent home with little planning, little money, few benefits, and vague promises of a future life insurance policy. A wartime bubble in prices of farmland burst, leaving many farmers bankrupt or deeply in debt after they purchased new land. Major strikes in the steel, coal, and meatpacking industries disrupted the economy in 1919. Leonard Williams Levy and Louis Fisher, eds. Encyclopedia of the American Presidency (1994) p. 494. Racial animosity erupted in serious race riots of ethnic whites against blacks in Chicago, Omaha, and two dozen other major cities in the North. 

As the election of 1920 approached, Wilson imagined that a deadlocked Democratic convention might nominate hinm for a third term with a campaign focused on the League of Nations. No one around the President dared tell him that he was incapacitated, had little support, and the League was a lost cause. David Pietrusza, 1920: The Year of Six Presidents (NY: Carroll & Graf Publishers, 2007), 191–2, 198–200, 253 In retirement, Wilson made elaborate plans for a White House run in 1924; he had no serious support. 

====Incapacity==== 
Woodrow Wilson's first posed photograph after his stroke. He was paralyzed on his left side, so his wife Edith holds a document steady while he signs. June 1920.
The immediate cause of his incapacitation in September 1919 was the physical strain of the public speaking tour he undertook to obtain support for ratification of Treaty of Versailles. In Pueblo, Colorado, on September 25, 1919, he collapsed and never fully recovered. Wilson had long-standing arterial hypertension, a condition for which little could be done in the early 20th century. Timeline for Hypertension Treatment History, accessed September 14, 2009. During his presidency, he had repeated episodes of unexplained arm and hand weakness, and his retinal arteries were said to be abnormal on fundoscopic examination.The Health & Medical History of President Woodrow Wilson, accessed November 9, 2009. He developed severe headaches, diplopia (double vision), and evanescent weakness of the left arm and leg. In retrospect, those problems likely represented the effects of cerebral transient ischemic attacks. Weinstein EA, Woodrow Wilson: A Medical & Psychological Biography (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1981), pp. 260–270 

On October 2, 1919, he suffered a serious stroke that almost totally incapacitated him, leaving him paralyzed on his left side, and only able to see out of a corner of his right eye. This was a cataclysmic "cerebrovascular accident" (stroke) that left him with a dense and permanent paralysis of the left side of his body (hemiplegia), as well as hemianopsia. Park BE, The Impact of Illness of World Leaders (University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, 1986), pp. 3–76 He was confined to bed for weeks, sequestered from nearly everyone except his wife and his physician, Dr. Cary Grayson. Grayson CT, Woodrow Wilson: An Intimate Memoir (NY: Holt, Rhinehart, & Winston, 1960), pp. 96–110 For at least a few months, he used a wheelchair. Later, he could walk only with the assistance of a cane. His wife and his aide Joe Tumulty helped a journalist, Louis Seibold, present a false account of an interview with the President. 

With few exceptions, senior government officials were not allowed to see him for the remainder of his term. His wife took control, selecting issues for his attention and delegating other issues to his cabinet heads. Eventually, Wilson resumed his attendance at cabinet meetings, but his input there was perfunctory at best. Herbet Hoover, The Ordeal of Woodrow Wilson (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1958), pp. 271–278 By February 1920 the President's true condition was known to all. Nearly every major newspaper expressed qualms about Wilson's fitness for the presidency at a time when the League fight was reaching a climax and domestic issues such as strikes, unemployment, inflation and the threat of Communism were ablaze. There was no mechanism to remove him. Cooper, Wilson p. 555 

This was the most complex case of presidential disability in American history and became a central argument for the 25th Amendment, which handles the issue of a disabled president. Birch Bayh, One Heartbeat Away: Presidential Disability (New York: BobbsMerrill, 1968). Arthur S. Link, "Woodrow Wilson: A Cautionary Tale." Wake Forest Law Review 30 (1995): 585 Edwin A. Weinstein, "Denial of presidential disability: a case study of Woodrow Wilson," Psychiatry (1967) 30#4 pp. 376–91. 

===Administration and Cabinet===
Wilson's chief of staff ("Secretary") was Joseph Patrick Tumulty from 1913 to 1921, but he was largely upstaged after 1916 when Wilson's second wife, Edith Bolling Galt Wilson, assumed full control of Wilson's schedule. The most important foreign policy advisor and confidant was "Colonel" Edward M. House until Wilson broke with him in early 1919. Arthur Walworth, "Considerations on Woodrow Wilson and Edward M. House", Presidential Studies Quarterly 1994 24(1): 79–86. 
Woodrow Wilson and his cabinet in the Cabinet Room

===Judicial appointments===
Wilson appointed Louis Brandeis, the first Jewish Supreme Court justice.

====Supreme Court====
Wilson appointed three Associate Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:
* James Clark McReynolds in 1914. A conservative, he served more than 26 years and opposed the New Deal.
* Louis Dembitz Brandeis in 1916. A liberal, he served 22 years and wrote landmark opinions in cases respecting free speech and the right to privacy.
* John Hessin Clarke in 1916. He served just 6 years on the Court before resigning. He thoroughly disliked his work as an Associate Justice.

====Other courts====
Along with his Supreme Court appointments, Wilson appointed 75 federal judges, including three Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States, 20 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 52 judges to the United States district courts.

==Retirement, death and personal affairs==
The final resting place of Woodrow Wilson at the Washington National Cathedral
In 1921, Wilson and his wife Edith retired from the White House to an elegant 1915 town house in the Embassy Row (Kalorama) section of Washington, D.C. Wilson continued going for daily drives, and attended Keith's vaudeville theatre on Saturday nights. Wilson was one of only two Presidents (Theodore Roosevelt was the first) to have served as president of the American Historical Association. David Henry Burton. Theodore Roosevelt, American Politician, p.146. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1997, ISBN 0-8386-3727-2 

Wilson attended only two state occasions in his retirement: the ceremonies preceding the burial of the Unknown Soldier in Arlington National Cemetery, in Arlington, Virginia, on Armistice Day (November 11), 1921; and President Warren G. Harding's state funeral in the U.S. Capitol on August 8, 1923. On November 10, 1923, Wilson made a short Armistice Day radio speech from the library of his home, his last national address. The following day, Armistice Day itself, he spoke briefly from the front steps to more than 20,000 well wishers gathered outside the house. 

On February 3, 1924, Wilson died in his S Street home as a result of a stroke and other heart-related problems. He was interred in a sarcophagus in Washington National Cathedral, the only president interred in Washington, D.C. John Whitcomb, Claire Whitcomb. Real Life at the White House, p.262. Routledge, 2002, ISBN 0-415-93951-8 

Mrs. Wilson stayed in the home another 37 years, dying there on December 28, 1961, the day she was to be the guest of honor at the opening of the Woodrow Wilson Bridge across the Potomac River near and in Washington, D.C. This Interstate Highway drawbridge (on I-95 and I-495) crosses the southern tip of the District of Columbia as well as portions of Maryland and Virginia. 

Mrs. Wilson left the home and much of the contents to the National Trust for Historic Preservation to be made into a museum honoring her husband. The Woodrow Wilson House opened to the public in 1963, was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1964, and was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1966. "Woodrow Wilson House", National Park Service Website, accessed January 12, 2009 

Wilson wrote his one-page will on May 31, 1917, and appointed his wife Edith as his executrix. He left his daughter Margaret an annuity of $2,500 annually for as long as she remained unmarried, and left to his daughters what had been his first wife's personal property. The rest he left to Edith as a life estate with the provision that at her death, his daughters would divide the estate among themselves. In the event that Edith had a child, her children would inherit on an equal footing with his daughters. As the second Mrs. Wilson had no children from either of her marriages, he was thus providing for the child of a possible subsequent third marriage on her part. Wills of the U.S. Presidents, edited by Herbert R Collins and David B Weaver (New York: Communication Channels Inc., 1976) 176–177, ISBN 0-916164-01-2. 

==Civil rights==
Quotation from Woodrow Wilson's History of the American People as reproduced in the film The Birth of a Nation.

===African Americans===
Several historians have described Wilson's policies as racist; some also describe Wilson personally as a racist. 

In his book, History of the American People, Wilson depicted white European immigrants with empathy while African American immigrants and their children were regarded as unsuitable for citizenship and unable to assimilate positively into American society. Wilson believed that slavery was wrong on economic labor grounds, rather than for moral reasons. Wilson idealized the slavery system in the South, having viewed masters as patient with "indolent" slaves, whom Wilson believed were like "shiftless children". Wilson held contempt for the belief that African Americans could be free and self-governing. In terms of Reconstruction, Wilson held the common neo-Confederate view that the South was demoralized by Northern carpetbaggers and Congressional imposition of black equality justified extreme measures to reassert white supremacist national and state governments. Wilson viewed blacks as related to the animal world, having illustrated an elderly black man with monkey features. Wilson publicly and privately referred to blacks as "darkies". In 1912 many African Americans left the Republican Party to cast their vote for Wilson, a Democrat. They were encouraged by his promises of support for minorities. However, once in office, Wilson's cabinet members expanded racially segregationist policies. Black leaders who had supported Wilson in the 1912 election were angered when Wilson placed segregationist white Southerners in charge of many executive departments, and the administration acted to reduce the already-meager number of African-Americans in political-appointee positions. Wilson's cabinet officials, with the president's blessing, proceeded to establish official segregation in most federal government offices – in some departments for the first time since 1863. New facilities were designed to keep the races working there separated.

Historian Eric Foner says, "[Wilson's] administration imposed full racial segregation in Washington and hounded from office considerable numbers of black federal employees." Segregation was also quickly implemented at the Post Office Department headquarters in Washington, D.C. Many African American employees were downgraded and even fired. The segregation implemented in the Department of the Treasury and the Post Office Department involved not only screened-off working spaces, but also separate lunchrooms and toilets.

Some segregationist federal workplace policies introduced by the Wilson administration would remain until the Truman Administration in the 1940s. Executive Order 9980, July 26, 1948 

Other steps were taken by the Wilson Administration to make obtaining a civil service job more difficult for blacks. Primary among these was the requirement, implemented in 1914 and continued until 1940, that all candidates for civil service jobs attach a photograph to their application further allowing for discrimination in the hiring process. 

Despite these policies, Wilson was criticized by such hard-line segregationists as Georgia's Thomas E. Watson, for not going far enough in restricting black employment in the federal government. 'The Thomas E. Watson papers', University Publications of America, from Watson's Jeffersonian Weekly, April 11, 1912, quoted in Woodward, Tom Watson, p. 427. Retrieved October 13, 2013. 

Wilson did not interfere with the well-established system of Jim Crow and backed the demands of Southern Democrats that their states be left alone to deal with issues of race and black voting without interference from Washington. Douglas A. Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II, Anchor Books 2009, pp. 357–58. Wilson biographer A. Scott Berg concludes that at the time, "Wilson's racial views were fairly centrist in America." Berg notes that "Wilson treated every person of color, regardless of that person's position, with decency and dignity." 

In 1914, Wilson told The New York Times, "If the colored people made a mistake in voting for me, they ought to correct it." 

Wilson's War Department drafted hundreds of thousands of blacks into the army, giving them equal pay with whites, but kept them in all-black units with white officers, and kept the great majority out of combat. James J. Cooke, The All-Americans at War: The 82nd Division in the Great War, 1917–1918 (1999) When a delegation of blacks protested the discriminatory actions, Wilson told them "segregation is not a humiliation but a benefit, and ought to be so regarded by you gentlemen." W. E. B. Du Bois, a leader of the NAACP who had campaigned for Wilson was in 1918 offered an Army commission in charge of dealing with race relations; DuBois accepted, but he failed his Army physical and did not serve. Mark Ellis, Closing Ranks' and 'Seeking Honors': W. E. B. Du Bois in World War I" Journal of American History, 1992 79(1): 96–124. 

While president of Princeton University, Wilson had discouraged blacks from even applying for admission, preferring to keep the peace among white students and alumni than have black students admitted. Arthur Link, Wilson:The Road to the White House (Princeton University Press, 1947) 502 Wilson's History of the American People (1901) explained the Ku Klux Klan of the late 1860s as a lawless reaction to a lawless period. Wilson wrote that the Klan "began to attempt by intimidation what they were not allowed to attempt by the ballot or by any ordered course of public action". 

===White ethnic groups===
Wilson had harsh words to say about immigrants in his history books, but after entering politics in 1910, he worked to integrate immigrants into the Democratic party, the army, and American life. During the war, he demanded in return that they repudiate any loyalty to enemy nations. Irish Americans were powerful in the Democratic party and opposed going to war as allies of their traditional enemy Britain, especially after the violent suppression of the Easter Rebellion of 1916. Wilson won them over in 1917 by promising to ask Britain to give Ireland its independence. At Versailles, however, he reneged because he saw the Irish situation purely as an internal UK matter and did not perceive the dispute and the unrest in Ireland as comparable to the plight of the various nationalities in Europe as a fall-out from World War I. As a result, much of the Irish-American community vehemently denounced him. Wilson, in turn, blamed the Irish Americans and German Americans for lack of popular support for the League of Nations, saying: American Rhetoric, "Final Address in Support of the League of Nations", Woodrow Wilson, delivered September 25, 1919 in Pueblo, Colorado. John B. Duff, "German-Americans and the Peace, 1918–1920", American Jewish Historical Quarterly 1970 59(4): 424–459. and Duff, "The Versailles Treaty and the Irish-Americans", Journal of American History, 1968 55(3): 582–598. ISSN 0021-8723 

Wilson nominated the first Jew to the Supreme Court (Louis Brandeis), starting a long line of Jewish justices who would serve on the nation's highest court. Henry J. Abraham, Justices, Presidents, and Senators: A History of the U.S. Supreme Court Appointments from Washington to Bush II (2007), p. 24 

==Legacy==
Keystone Marker for Wilson, Pennsylvania, renamed for Woodrow Wilson
Wilson's Pierce Arrow on display in Staunton, VA

On December 28, 1925, less than two years after Wilson's death, the U.S. Post Office issued the 17-cent stamp in his honor. On January 10, 1956, the 7¢ Liberty Issue postage stamp honoring Wilson was also issued. A third 32¢ stamp was issued on February 3, 1998, as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series.

In recognition of having signed on March 2, 1917 the so-called "Jones Act" that granted United States citizenship to Puerto Ricans, streets in several municipalities in the U.S. territory were renamed "Calle Wilson", including one in the Mariani neighborhood in Ponce and the Condado section of San Juan.

The USS Woodrow Wilson (SSBN-624), a Lafayette-class ballistic missile submarine, was the only ship of the United States Navy to be named for Wilson. She later was converted into an attack submarine and redesignated SSN-624.

The Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs was founded at Princeton in 1930. It was created in the spirit of Wilson's interest in preparing students for leadership in public and international affairs.

Shadow Lawn, the Summer White House for Wilson during his term in office, became part of Monmouth University in 1956. The college has placed a marker on the building, renamed Woodrow Wilson Hall, commemorating the home. It was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1985.

In 1929, Wilson's image appeared on the $100,000 bill. The bill, now out of print but still legal tender, was used only to transfer money between Federal Reserve banks. Ask Yahoo! November 10, 2005 The $100,000 bill Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

In 1944, Darryl F. Zanuck of 20th Century Fox produced a film titled Wilson. It looked back with nostalgia to Wilson's presidency, especially concerning his role as commander-in-chief during World War I.

A section of the Rambla of Montevideo, Uruguay, is named Rambla Presidente Wilson. A street in the 16th arondissement in Paris, running from Trocadéro to the Place de l'Alma, is named the Avenue du Président Wilson. The Pont Wilson crosses the Rhône river in the center of Lyon, France. The Boulevard du Président Wilson extends from the main train station of Strasbourg and connects to the Boulevard Clemenceau. In Bordeaux, the Boulevard du Président Wilson links to the Boulevard George V. The Quai du Président Wilson forms part of the port of Marseille. Praha hlavní nádraží, the main railway station of Prague has, for much of its history, been known as the "Wilson Station" (Czech: Wilsonovo nádraží). The in Ghent, Belgium.

In 2010, Wilson was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame. 

In its impact upon American society, while the Wilson Administration accomplished much in the way of social reform during its eight years in office, it did not go as far as Theodore Roosevelt's proposed New Nationalism in relation to the latter's calls for a standard 40-hour work week, minimum wage laws, and a federal system of social insurance. This was arguably a reflection of Wilson's own ideological convictions, who adhered to the classical liberal principles of Jeffersonian Democracy The Ordeal of Woodrow Wilson by Herbert Hoover and Mark Hatfield and was opposed to both minimum wage legislation and social insurance, only reluctantly (shortly before his 1916 re-election campaign) consenting to endorse a bill to expand workmen's compensation benefits for Federal employees after there had been widespread public acceptance of the idea. Despite this, Wilson and his New Freedom did much to extend the power of the federal government in social and economic affairs, and arguably paved the way for future reform programs such as the New Deal and the Great Society.

==Media==
{
File:Woodrow Wilson at a parade, 1918.ogg|Wilson tips his hat as he exits the White House on his way to a parade along Pennsylvania Avenue (1918).
File:Woodrow Wilson video montage.ogg|Collection of video clips of the president

==Books and writing==
The publications of Wilson's authorship are extensive.

Of the books published under his authorship, The New Freedom contains controversial yet relevant assertions. "Our Government has been for the past few years under the control of the heads of great allied corporations with special interests." "The Government has not controlled these interests ... it has submitted itself to their control". - p. 25, "We vote : we are offered the platform we want ; we elect the men who stand on that platform, and we get absolutely nothing." -p. 27, "We know that the machines of both parties are subsidised by the same persons, and therefore it is useless to turn in either direction." -p. 27.

==See also==
* Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars
* Silent Sentinels
* Do Your Bit for America
* History of the United States (1865–1918)
* History of the United States (1918–45)
* Idealism (international relations)
* List of Presidents of the United States
* Progressivism in the United States
* U.S. presidents on U.S. postage stamps

==Notes==

==Bibliography==

===Biographical===
* Berg, A. Scott. Wilson (2013), full-scale scholarly biography
* Blum, John. Woodrow Wilson and the Politics of Morality (1956); short scholarly biography
* Brands, H. W. Woodrow Wilson 1913–1921 (2003); short scholarly biography
* Cooper, John Milton. Woodrow Wilson: A Biography (2009), full-scale scholarly biography
* 
* 
* Link, Arthur S. "Woodrow Wilson" in Henry F. Graff ed., The Presidents: A Reference History (2002) pp. 365–388; short scholarly biography
* Link, Arthur Stanley. Wilson: The Road to the White House (1947), first volume of standard biography (to 1917); Wilson: The New Freedom (1956); Wilson: The Struggle for Neutrality: 1914–1915 (1960); Wilson: Confusions and Crises: 1915–1916 (1964); Wilson: Campaigns for Progressivism and Peace: 1916–1917 (1965), the last volume of standard scholarly biography
* Maynard, W. Barksdale. Woodrow Wilson: Princeton to the Presidency (2008)
* Miller, Kristie. Ellen and Edith: Woodrow Wilson's First Ladies (University Press of Kansas, 2010)
* Post, Jerrold M. "Woodrow Wilson Re-Examined: The Mind-Body Controversy Redux and Other Disputations," Political Psychology (1983) 4#2 pp. 289–306 in JSTOR, on Wilson's self-defeating behavior
* ; full scale scholarly biography

===Scholarly topical studies===
* Ambrosius, Lloyd E., "Woodrow Wilson and George W. Bush: Historical Comparisons of Ends and Means in Their Foreign Policies", Diplomatic History, 30 (June 2006), 509–43.
* Bailey; Thomas A. Wilson and the Peacemakers: Combining Woodrow Wilson and the Lost Peace and Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal (1947); detailed coverage of 1919
* Clements, Kendrick, A. Woodrow Wilson: World Statesman (1999)
* Clements, Kendrick A. The Presidency of Woodrow Wilson (1992), a standard scholarly survey
* Clements, Kendrick A. "Woodrow Wilson and World War I", Presidential Studies Quarterly 34:1 (2004). pp. 62+
* Cooper, John Milton, ed. Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson: Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2008)
* Cooper, John Milton. "Making A Case for Wilson," in Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson (2008) ch 1
* Davis, Donald E. and Eugene P. Trani. The First Cold War: The Legacy of Woodrow Wilson in U.S.-Soviet Relations] (2002) online
* Greene, Theodore P., ed. Wilson at Versailles (1957) essays by scholars and primary sources
* Hofstadter, Richard. "Woodrow Wilson: The Conservative as Liberal" in The American Political Tradition (1948), ch. 10.
* Janis, Mark Weston. "How Wilsonian Was Woodrow Wilson?," Dartmouth Law Journal (2007) 5:1 pp. 1–15 online
* Kazianis, Harry. "Woodrow Wilson: Civil War, Morality and Foreign Policy", E-International Relations (2011), E-ir.info
* Kennedy, Ross A., ed. A Companion to Woodrow Wilson (2013), historiographical essays by scholars
* Knock, Thomas J. To End All Wars: Woodrow Wilson and the Quest for a New World Order (1995)
* Levin, Jr., N. Gordon. Woodrow Wilson and World Politics: America's Response to War and Revolution (1968)
* Link, Arthur Stanley. Woodrow Wilson and the Progressive Era, 1910–1917 (1972) standard political history of the era
* Link, Arthur S.; Wilson the Diplomatist: A Look at His Major Foreign Policies (1957)
* Link, Arthur S.; Woodrow Wilson and a Revolutionary World, 1913–1921 (1982)
* Livermore, Seward W. Woodrow Wilson and the War Congress, 1916–1918 (1966)
* Malin, James C. The United States after the World War (1930) online
* Saunders, Robert M. In Search of Woodrow Wilson: Beliefs and Behavior (1998)
* Trani, Eugene P. "Woodrow Wilson and the Decision to Intervene in Russia: A Reconsideration". Journal of Modern History (1976). 48:440–61. in JSTOR
* Tucker, Robert W. Woodrow Wilson and the Great War: Reconsidering America's Neutrality, 1914–1917 (2007)
* Vought, Hans. "Woodrow Wilson, Ethnicity, and the Myth of American Unity". In Myth America: A Historical Anthology, Volume II. 1997. Gerster, Patrick, and Cords, Nicholas. (editors.) Brandywine Press, St. James, NY. ISBN 1-881-089-97-5
* Walworth, Arthur; Wilson and His Peacemakers: American Diplomacy at the Paris Peace Conference, 1919 (1986)
* Yellin, Eric S. Racism in the Nation's Service: Government Workers and the Color Line in Woodrow Wilson's America (2013)
* 

===Primary sources===
* August Heckscher, ed., The Politics of Woodrow Wilson: Selections from his Speeches and Writings (1956)
* Complete in 69 volumes at major academic libraries. Annotated edition of all of Wilson's correspondence, speeches and writings.
* . Memoir by Wilson's chief of staff.
* Arno Press reprint: 1981.
* Wilson, Woodrow. "Congressional government: a study in American politics (1885)"
* 1912 campaign speeches
* 
* 3 volumes, 1918 and later editions.
* Woodrow Wilson, compiled with his approval by Hamilton Foley; Woodrow Wilson's Case for the League of Nations, Princeton University Press, Princeton 1923; contemporary book review
* Wilson, Woodrow. Messages & Papers of Woodrow Wilson 2 vol (ISBN 1-135-19812-8)
* Wilson, Woodrow. The New Democracy. Presidential Messages, Addresses, and Other Papers (1913–1917) 2 vol 1926, ISBN 0-89875-775-4
* Wilson, Woodrow. President Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points (1918)

==External links==

* Woodrow Wilson Additional Papers at the Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University
* Woodrow Wilson visits Carlisle – UK
* Ode to Woodrow Wilson
* Official White House biography
* Woodrow Wilson: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
* Woodrow Wilson Original Letters as President Shapell Manuscript Foundation
* Presidential Biography by Stanley L. Klos
* Audio clips of Wilson's speeches
* First Inaugural Address
* Second Inaugural Address
* President Wilson's War Address
* Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library at His Birthplace Staunton, Virginia
* Boyhood Home of President Woodrow Wilson Augusta, GA
* Woodrow Wilson House Washington, D.C.
* Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars Washington, D.C.
* Woodrow Wilson Links
* 
* Library of Congress: "Today in History: December 28"
* Library of Congress: "Today in History: June 9"
* Woodrow Wilson Ancestral Home
* Woodrow Wilson: Prophet of Peace, a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
* President Woodrow Wilson: Address To The American Indians
* New Jersey Governor Thomas Woodrow Wilson, National Governors Association (listen online)
* Biography of Woodrow Wilson, New Jersey State Library
* NY Times main headline, April 2, 1917, President Calls for War Declaration, Stronger Navy, New Army of 500,000 Men, Full Cooperation With Germany's Foes
* Extensive essay on Woodrow Wilson and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
* Woodrow Wilson at C-SPAN's 
* Booknotes interview with August Heckscher on Woodrow Wilson: A Biography, January 12, 1992.
* Booknotes interview with Phyllis Lee Levin on Edith and Woodrow: The Wilson White House, December 9, 2001.

 


